 Mr. Smith, Mr. Nixon.
In the election of 1860, Abraham Lincoln said the question was whether this nation could exist half-slave or half-free.
In the election of 1960, and with the world around us, the question is whether the world will exist half-slave or half-free, whether it will move in the direction of freedom, in the direction of the road that we are taking, or whether it will move in the direction of slavery.
I think it will depend in great measure upon what we do here in the United States, on the kind of society that we build, on the kind of strength that we maintain.
We discuss tonight domestic issues, but I would not want that to be any implication to be given that this does not involve directly our struggle with Mr. Khrushchev for survival.
Mr. Khrushchev is in New York, and he maintains the Communist offensive throughout the world because of the productive power of the Soviet Union itself.
The Chinese Communists have always had a large population.
But they are important and dangerous now because they are mounting a major effort within their own country.
The kind of country we have here, the kind of society we have, the kind of strength we build in the United States will be the defense of freedom.
If we do well here, if we meet our obligations, if we're moving ahead, then I think freedom will be secure around the world.
If we fail, then freedom fails.
Therefore, I think the question before the American people is: Are we doing as much as we can do?
Are we as strong as we should be?
Are we as strong as we must be if we're going to maintain our independence, and if we're going to maintain and hold out the hand of friendship to those who look to us for assistance, to those who look to us for survival?
I should make it very clear that I do not think we're doing enough, that I am not satisfied as an American with the progress that we're making.
This is a great country, but I think it could be a greater country; and this is a powerful country, but I think it could be a more powerful country.
I'm not satisfied to have fifty percent of our steel-mill capacity unused.
I'm not satisfied when the United States had last year the lowest rate of economic growth of any major industrialized society in the world.
Because economic growth means strength and vitality; it means we're able to sustain our defenses; it means we're able to meet our commitments abroad.
I'm not satisfied when we have over nine billion dollars worth of food - some of it rotting - even though there is a hungry world, and even though four million Americans wait every month for a food package from the government, which averages five cents a day per individual.
I saw cases in West Virginia, here in the United States, where children took home part of their school lunch in order to feed their families because I don't think we're meeting our obligations toward these Americans.
I'm not satisfied when the Soviet Union is turning out twice as many scientists and engineers as we are.
I'm not satisfied when many of our teachers are inadequately paid, or when our children go to school part-time shifts.
I think we should have an educational system second to none.
I'm not satisfied when I see men like Jimmy Hoffa - in charge of the largest union in the United States - still free.
I'm not satisfied when we are failing to develop the natural resources of the United States to the fullest.
Here in the United States, which developed the Tennessee Valley and which built the Grand Coulee and the other dams in the Northwest United States at the present rate of hydropower production - and that is the hallmark of an industrialized society - the Soviet Union by 1975 will be producing more power than we are.
These are all the things, I think, in this country that can make our society strong, or can mean that it stands still.
I'm not satisfied until every American enjoys his full constitutional rights.
If a Negro baby is born - and this is true also of Puerto Ricans and Mexicans in some of our cities - he has about one-half as much chance to get through high school as a white baby.
He has one-third as much chance to get through college as a white student.
He has about a third as much chance to be a professional man, about half as much chance to own a house.
He has about uh - four times as much chance that he'll be out of work in his life as the white baby.
I think we can do better.
I don't want the talents of any American to go to waste.
I know that there are those who want to turn everything over to the government.
I don't at all.
I want the individuals to meet their responsibilities.
And I want the states to meet their responsibilities.
But I think there is also a national responsibility.
The argument has been used against every piece of social legislation in the last twenty-five years.
The people of the United States individually could not have developed the Tennessee Valley; collectively they could have.
A cotton farmer in Georgia or a peanut farmer or a dairy farmer in Wisconsin and Minnesota, he cannot protect himself against the forces of supply and demand in the market place; but working together in effective governmental programs he can do so.
Seventeen million Americans, who live over sixty-five on an average Social Security check of about seventy-eight dollars a month, they're not able to sustain themselves individually, but they can sustain themselves through the social security system.
I don't believe in big government, but I believe in effective governmental action.
And I think that's the only way that the United States is going to maintain its freedom.
It's the only way that we're going to move ahead.
I think we can do a better job.
I think we're going to have to do a better job if we are going to meet the responsibilities which time and events have placed upon us.
We cannot turn the job over to anyone else.
If the United States fails, then the whole cause of freedom fails.
And I think it depends in great measure on what we do here in this country.
The reason Franklin Roosevelt was a good neighbor in Latin America was because he was a good neighbor in the United States.
Because they felt that the American society was moving again.
I want us to recapture that image.
I want people in Latin America and Africa and Asia to start to look to America; to see how we're doing things; to wonder what the resident of the United States is doing; and not to look at Khrushchev, or look at the Chinese Communists.
That is the obligation upon our generation.
In 1933, Franklin Roosevelt said in his inaugural that this generation of Americans has a rendezvous with destiny.
I think our generation of Americans has the same rendezvous.
The question now is: Can freedom be maintained under the most severe tack - attack it has ever known?
I think it can be.
And I think in the final analysis it depends upon what we do here.
I think it's time America started moving again.
 Mr. Smith, Senator Kennedy.
The things that Senator Kennedy has said many of us can agree with.
There is no question but that we cannot discuss our internal affairs in the United States without recognizing that they have a tremendous bearing on our international position.
There is no question but that this nation cannot stand still; because we are in a deadly competition, a competition not only with the men in the Kremlin, but the men in Peking.
We're ahead in this competition, as Senator Kennedy, I think, has implied.
But when you're in a race, the only way to stay ahead is to move ahead.
And I subscribe completely to the spirit that Senator Kennedy has expressed tonight, the spirit that the United States should move ahead.
Where, then, do we disagree?
I think we disagree on the implication of his remarks tonight and on the statements that he has made on many occasions during his campaign to the effect that the United States has been standing still.
We heard tonight, for example, the statement made that our growth in national product last year was the lowest of any industrial nation in the world.
Now last year, of course, was 1958.
That happened to be a recession year.
But when we look at the growth of G.N.P.
this year, a year of recovery, we find that it's six and nine-tenths per cent and one of the highest in the world today.
More about that later.
Looking then to this problem of how the United States should move ahead and where the United States is moving, I think it is well that we take the advice of a very famous campaigner: Let's look at the record.
Is the United States standing still?
Is it true that this Administration, as Senator Kennedy has charged, has been an Administration of retreat, of defeat, of stagnation?
Is it true that, as far as this country is concerned, in the field of electric power, in all of the fields that he has mentioned, we have not been moving ahead.
Well, we have a comparison that we can make.
We have the record of the Truman Administration of seven and a half years and the seven and a half years of the Eisenhower Administration.
When we compare these two records in the areas that Senator Kennedy has - has discussed tonight, I think we find that America has been moving ahead.
Let's take schools.
We have built more schools in these last seven and a half years than we built in the previous seven and a half, for that matter in the previous twenty years.
Let's take hydroelectric power.
We have developed more hydroelectric power in these seven and a half years than was developed in any previous administration in history.
Let us take hospitals.
We find that more have been built in this Administration than in the previous Administration.
The same is true of highways.
Let's put it in terms that all of us can understand.
We often hear gross national product discussed and in that respect may I say that when we compare the growth in this Administration with that of the previous Administration that then there was a total growth of eleven percent over seven years; in this Administration there has been a total growth of nineteen per cent over seven years.
That shows that there's been more growth in this Administration than in its predecessor.
But let's not put it there; let's put it in terms of the average family.
What has happened to you?
We find that your wages have gone up five times as much in the Eisenhower Administration as they did in the Truman Administration.
What about the prices you pay?
We find that the prices you pay went up five times as much in the Truman Administration as they did in the Eisenhower Administration.
What's the net result of this?
This means that the average family income went up fifteen per cent in the Eisenhower years as against two per cent in the Truman years.
Now, this is not standing still.
But, good as this record is, may I emphasize it isn't enough.
A record is never something to stand on.
It's something to build on.
And in building on this record, I believe that we have the secret for progress, we know the way to progress.
And I think, first of all, our own record proves that we know the way.
Senator Kennedy has suggested that he believes he knows the way.
I respect the sincerity which he m- which he makes that suggestion.
But on the other hand, when we look at the various programs that he offers, they do not seem to be new.
They seem to be simply retreads of the programs of the Truman Administration which preceded it.
And I would suggest that during the course of the evening he might indicate those areas in which his programs are new, where they will mean more progress than we had then.
What kind of programs are we for?
We are for programs that will expand educational opportunities, that will give to all Americans their equal chance for education, for all of the things which are necessary and dear to the hearts of our people.
We are for programs, in addition, which will see that our medical care for the aged are - is - are much - is much better handled than it is at the present time.
Here again, may I indicate that Senator Kennedy and I are not in disagreement as to the aims.
We both want to help the old people.
We want to see that they do have adequate medical care.
The question is the means.
I think that the means that I advocate will reach that goal better than the means that he advocates.
I could give better examples, but for - for whatever it is, whether it's in the field of housing, or health, or medical care, or schools, or the eh- development of electric power, we have programs which we believe will move America, move her forward and build on the wonderful record that we have made over these past seven and a half years.
Now, when we look at these programs, might I suggest that in evaluating them we often have a tendency to say that the test of a program is how much you're spending.
I will concede that in all the areas to which I have referred Senator Kennedy would have the spe- federal government spend more than I would have it spend.
I costed out the cost of the Democratic platform.
It runs a minimum of thirteen and two-tenths billions dollars a year more than we are presently spending to a maximum of eighteen billion dollars a year more than we're presently spending.
Now the Republican platform will cost more too.
It will cost a minimum of four billion dollars a year more, a maximum of four and nine-tenths billion dollar a year more than we're presently spending.
Now, does this mean that his program is better than ours?
Not at all.
Because it isn't a question of how much the federal government spends; it isn't a question of which government does the most.
It is a question of which administration does the right thing.
And in our case, I do believe that our programs will stimulate the creative energies of a hundred and eighty million free Americans.
I believe the programs that Senator Kennedy advocates will have a tendency to stifle those creative energies, I believe in other words, that his program would lead to the stagnation of the motive power that we need in this country to get progress.
The final point that I would like to make is this: Senator Kennedy has suggested in his speeches that we lack compassion for the poor, for the old, and for others that are unfortunate.
Let us understand throughout this campaign that his motives and mine are sincere.
I know what it means to be poor.
I know what it means to see people who are unemployed.
I know Senator Kennedy feels as deeply about these problems as I do, but our disagreement is not about the goals for America but only about the means to reach those goals.
 Well, the Vice President and I came to the Congress together 1946; we both served in the Labor Committee.
I've been there now for fourteen years, the same period of time that he has, so that our experience in uh - government is comparable.
Secondly, I think the question is uh - what are the programs that we advocate, what is the party record that we lead?
I come out of the Democratic party, which in this century has produced Woodrow Wilson and Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman, and which supported and sustained these programs which I've discussed tonight.
Mr. Nixon comes out of the Republican party.
He was nominated by it.
And it is a fact that through most of these last twenty-five years the Republican leadership has opposed federal aid for education, medical care for the aged, development of the Tennessee Valley, development of our natural resources.
I think Mr. Nixon is an effective leader of his party.
I hope he would grant me the same.
The question before us is: which point of view and which party do we want to lead the United States?
 It would be rather difficult to cover them in eight and- in two and a half minutes.
I would suggest that these proposals could be mentioned.
First, after each of my foreign trips I have made recommendations that have been adopted.
For example, after my first trip abroad - abroad, I strongly recommended that we increase our exchange programs particularly as they related to exchange of persons of leaders in the labor field and in the information field.
After my trip to South America, I made recommendations that a separate inter-American lending agency be set up which the South American nations would like much better than a lend- than to participate in the lending agencies which treated all the countries of the world the same.
Uh - I have made other recommendations after each of the other trips; for example, after my trip abroad to Hungary I made some recommendations with regard to the Hungarian refugee situation which were adopted, not only by the President but some of them were enacted into law by the Congress.
Within the Administration, as a chairman of the President's Committee on Price Stability and Economic Growth, I have had the opportunity to make recommendations which have been adopted within the Administration and which I think have been reasonably effective.
I know Senator Kennedy suggested in his speech at Cleveland yesterday that that committee had not been particularly effective.
I would only suggest that while we do not take the credit for it - I would not presume to - that since that committee has been formed the price line has been held very well within the United States.
 Well, I would say in the latter that the - and that's what I found uh - somewhat unsatisfactory about the figures uh - Mr. Nixon, that you used in your previous speech, when you talked about the Truman Administration.
You - Mr. Truman came to office in nineteen uh - forty-four and at the end of the war, and uh - difficulties that were facing the United States during that period of transition - 1946 when price controls were lifted - so it's rather difficult to use an overall figure taking those seven and a half years and comparing them to the last eight years.
I prefer to take the overall percentage record of the last twenty years of the Democrats and the eight years of the Republicans to show an overall period of growth.
In regard to uh - price stability uh - I'm not aware that that committee did produce recommendations that ever were certainly before the Congress from the point of view of legislation in regard to controlling prices.
In regard to the exchange of students and labor unions, I am chairman of the subcommittee on Africa and I think that one of the most unfortunate phases of our policy towards that country was the very minute number of exchanges that we had.
I think it's true of Latin America also.
We did come forward with a program of students for the Congo of over three hundred which was more than the federal government had for all of Africa the previous year, so that I don't think that uh - we have moved at least in those two areas with sufficient vigor.
 That's correct.
 Well, because I think that if the federal government moved out of the program and withdrew its supports uh - then I think you would have complete uh - economic chaos.
The farmer plants in the spring and harvests in the fall.
There are hundreds of thousands of them.
They really don't - they're not able to control their market very well.
They bring their crops in or their livestock in, many of them about the same time.
They have only a few purchasers that buy their milk or their hogs - a few large companies in many cases - and therefore the farmer is not in a position to bargain very effectively in the market place.
I think the experience of the twenties has shown what a free market could do to agriculture.
And if the agricultural economy collapses, then the economy of the rest of the United States sooner or later will collapse.
The farmers are the number one market for the automobile industry of the United States.
The automobile industry is the number one market for steel.
So if the farmers' economy continues to decline as sharply as it has in recent years, then I think you would have a recession in the rest of the country.
So I think the case for the government intervention is a good one.
Secondly, my objection to present farm policy is that there are no effective controls to bring supply and demand into better balance.
The dropping of the support price in order to limit production does not work, and we now have the highest uh - surpluses - nine billion dollars worth.
We've had a uh - higher tax load from the Treasury for the farmer in the last few years with the lowest farm income in many years.
I think that this farm policy has failed.
In my judgment the only policy that will work will be for effective supply and demand to be in balance.
And that can only be done through governmental action.
I therefore suggest that in those basic commodities which are supported, that the federal government, after endorsement by the farmers in that commodity, attempt to bring supply and demand into balance - attempt effective production controls - so that we won't have that five or six per cent surplus which breaks the price fifteen or twenty per cent.
I think Mr. Benson's program has failed.
And I must say, after reading the Vice President's speech before the farmers, as he read mine, I don't believe that it's very much different from Mr. Benson's.
I don't think it provides effective governmental controls.
I think the support prices are tied to the average market price of the last three years, which was Mr. Benson's theory.
I therefore do not believe that this is a sharp enough breach with the past to give us any hope of success for the future.
 Well, I would suggest, Mr. Vanocur, that uh - if you know the President, that was probably a facetious remark.
Uh - I would also suggest that insofar as his statement is concerned, that I think it would be improper for the President of the United States to disclose uh - the instances in which members of his official family had made recommendations, as I have made them through the years to him, which he has accepted or rejected.
The President has always maintained and very properly so that he is entitled to get what advice he wants from his cabinet and from his other advisers without disclosing that to anybody - including as a matter of fact the Congress.
Now, I can only say this.
Through the years I have sat in the National Security Council.
I have been in the cabinet.
I have met with the legislative leaders.
I have met with the President when he made the great decisions with regard to Lebanon, Quemoy and Matsu, other matters.
The President has asked for my advice.
I have given it.
Sometimes my advice has been taken.
Sometimes it has not.
I do not say that I have made the decisions.
And I would say that no president should ever allow anybody else to make the major decisions, The president only makes the decisions.
All that his advisers do is to give counsel when he asks for it.
As far as what experience counts and whether that is experience that counts, that isn't for me to say.
Uh - I can only say that my experience is there for the people to consider; Senator Kennedy's is there for the people to consider.
As he pointed out, we came to the Congress in the same year.
His experience has been different from mine.
Mine has been in the executive branch.
His has been in the legislative branch.
I would say that the people now have the opportunity to evaluate his as against mine and I think both he and I are going to abide by whatever the people decide.
 I didn't indicate.
I did not advocate reducing the federal debt because I don't believe that you're going to be able to reduce the federal debt very much in nineteen sixty-one, two, or three.
I think you have heavy obligations which affect our security, which we're going to have to meet.
And therefore I've never suggested we should uh - be able to retire the debt substantially, or even at all in nineteen sixty-one or two.
 No, never.
 No.
No.
Not reducing the interest -
 - reducing the interest rate.
In my judgment, the hard money, tight money policy, fiscal policy of this Administration has contributed to the slow-down in our economy, which helped bring the recession of fifty-four; which made the recession of fifty-eight rather intense, and which has slowed, somewhat, our economic activity in 1960.
What I have talked about, however, the kind of programs that I've talked about, in my judgment, are uh - fiscally sound.
Medical care for the aged, I would put under social security.
The Vice President and I disagree on this.
The program - the Javits-Nixon or the Nixon-Javits program - would have cost, if fully used uh - six hundred million dollars by the government per year, and six hundred million dollars by the state.
The program which I advocated, which failed by five votes in the United States Senate, would have put medical care for the aged in Social Security, and would have been paid for through the Social Security System and the Social Security tax.
Secondly, I support federal aid to education and federal aid for teachers' salaries.
I think that's a good investment.
I think we're going to have to do it.
And I think to heap the burden further on the property tax, which is already strained in many of our communities, will provide, will make sh- insure, in my opinion, that many of our children will not be adequately educated, and many of our teachers not adequately compensated.
There is no greater return to an economy or to a society than an educational system second to none.
On the question of the development of natural resources, I would pay as you go in the sense that they would be balanced and the power revenues would bring back sufficient money to finance the projects, in the same way as the Tennessee Valley.
I believe in the balanced budget.
And the only conditions under which I would unbalance the budget would be if there was a grave national emergency or a serious recession.
Otherwise, with a steady rate of economic growth - and Mr. Nixon and Mr. Rockefeller, in their meeting, said a five per cent economic growth would bring by 1962 ten billion dollars extra in tax revenues.
Whatever is brought in, I think that we can finance essential programs within a balanced budget, if business remains orderly.
 Yes.
I think what Mr. Novins was referring to was not one of Senator Kennedy's speeches, but the Democratic platform, which did mention cutting the national debt.
I think, too, that it should be pointed out that of course it is not possible, particularly under the proposals that Senator Kennedy has advocated, either to cut the national debt or to reduce taxes.
As a matter of fact it will be necessary to raise taxes.
As Senator Kennedy points out that as far as his one proposal is concerned - the one for medical care for the aged - that that would be financed out of Social Security.
That, however, is raising taxes for those who pay Social Security.
He points out that he would make pay-as-you-go be the basis for our natural resources development.
Where our natural resources development - which I also support, incidentally, however - whenever you uh - uh - in - in - uh - appropriates money for one of these projects, you have to pay now and appropriate the money and the eh- while they eventually do pay out, it doesn't mean that you - the government doesn't have to put out the money this year.
And so I would say that in all of these proposals Senator Kennedy has made, they will result in one of two things: either he has to raise taxes or he has to unbalance the budget.
If he unbalances the budget, that means you have inflation, and that will be, of course, a very cruel blow to the very people - the older people - that we've been talking about.
As far as aid for school construction is concerned, I favor that, as Senator Kennedy did, in January of this year, when he said he favored that rather than aid to s- teacher salaries.
I favor that because I believe that's the best way to aid our schools without running any risk whatever of the federal government telling our teachers what to teach.
 I'm awfully glad you ge- got that question because as you know I got into it at the last of my other question and wasn't able to complete the argument.
Uh - I think that the reason that I voted against having the federal government uh - pay teachers' salaries was probably the very reason that concerned Senator Kennedy when in January of this year, in his kick-off press conference, he said that he favored aid for school construction, but at that time did not feel that there should be aid for teachers' salaries - at least that's the way I read his remarks.
Now, why should there be any question about the federal government aiding s- teachers' salaries?
Why did Senator Kennedy take that position then?
Why do I take it now?
We both took it then, and I take it now, for this reason: we want higher teachers' salaries.
We need higher teachers' salaries.
But we also want our education to be free of federal control.
When the federal government gets the power to pay teachers, inevitably in my opinion, it will acquire the power to set standards and to tell the teachers what to teach.
I think this would be bad for the country; I think it would be bad for the teaching profession.
There is another point that should be made.
I favor higher salaries for teachers.
But, as Senator Kennedy said in January of this year in this same press conference, the way that you get higher salaries for teachers is to support school construction, which means that all of the local school districts in the various states then have money which is freed to raise the standards for teachers' salaries.
I should also point out this; once you put the responsibility on the federal government for paying a portion of teachers' salaries, your local communities and your states are not going to meet the responsibility as much as they should.
I believe, in other words, that we have seen the local communities and the state assuming more of that responsibility.
Teachers' salaries very fortunately have gone up fifty percent in the last eight years as against only a thirty-four percent rise for other salaries.
This is not enough; it should be more.
But I do not believe that the way to get more salaries for teachers is to have the federal government get in with a massive program.
My objection here is not the cost in dollars.
My objection here is the potential cost in controls and eventual freedom for the American people by giving the federal government power over education, and that is the greatest power a government can have.
 When uh - the Vice President quotes me in January, sixty, I do not believe the federal government should pay directly teachers' salaries, but that was not the issue before the Senate in February.
The issue before the Senate was that the money would be given to the state.
The state then could determine whether the money would be spent for school construction or teacher salaries.
On that question the Vice President and I disagreed.
I voted in favor of that proposal and supported it strongly, because I think that that provided assistance to our teachers for their salaries without any chance of federal control and it is on that vote that th- Mr. Nixon and I disagreed, and his tie vote uh - defeated his breaking the tie defeated the proposal.
I don't want the federal government paying teachers' salaries directly.
But if the money will go to the states and the states can then determine whether it shall go for school construction or for teachers' salaries, in my opinion you protect the local authority over the school board and the school committee.
And therefore I think that was a sound proposal and that is why I supported it and I regret that it did not pass.
Secondly, there have been statements made that uh - the Democratic platform would cost a good deal of money and that I am in favor of unbalancing the budget.
That is wholly wrong, wholly in error, and it is a fact that in the last eight years the Democratic Congress has reduced the appropri- the requests for the appropriations by over ten billion dollars.
That is not my view and I think it ought to be stated very clearly on the record.
My view is that you can do these programs - and they should be carefully drawn - within a balanced budget if our economy is moving ahead.
 Well as you take the bills -
 If I may take the bills, we did pass in the Senate a bill uh - to provide a dollar twenty-five cent minimum wage.
It failed because the House did not pass it and the House failed by eleven votes.
And I might say that two-thirds of the Republicans in the House voted against a dollar twenty-five cent minimum wage and a majority of the Democrats sustained it - nearly two-thirds of them voted for the dollar twenty-five.
We were threatened by a veto if we passed a dollar and a quarter - it's extremely difficult with the great power that the president does to pass any bill when the president is opposed to it.
All the president needs to sustain his veto of any bill is one-third plus one in either the House or the Senate.
Secondly, we passed a federal aid to education bill in the Senate.
It failed to came to the floor of the House of Representatives.
It was killed in the Rules Committee.
And it is a fact in the August session that the four members of the Rules Committee who were Republicans joining with two Democrats voted against sending the aid to education bill to the floor of the House.
Four Democrats voted for it.
Every Republican on the Rules Committee voted against sending that bill to be considered by the members of the House of Representatives.
Thirdly, on medical care for the aged, this is the same fight that's been going on for twenty-five years in Social Security.
We wanted to tie it to Social Security.
We offered an amendment to do so.
Forty-four Democrats voted for it, one Republican voted for it.
And we were informed at the time it came to a vote that if it was adopted the President of the United States would veto it.
In my judgment, a vigorous Democratic president supported by a Democratic majority in the House and Senate can win the support for these programs.
But if you send a Republican president and a Democratic majority and the threat of a veto hangs over the Congress, in my judgment you will continue what happened in the August session, which is a clash of parties and inaction.
 Well obviously my views are a little different.
First of all, I don't see how it's possible for a one-third of a body, such as the Republicans have in the House and the Senate to stop two-thirds, if the two-thirds are adequately led.
I would say, too, that when Senator Kennedy refers to the action of the House Rules Committee, there are eight Democrats on that committee and four Republicans.
It would seem to me again that it is very difficult to blame the four Republicans for the eight Democrats' not getting a something through that particular committee.
I would say further that to blame the President in his veto power for the inability of the Senator and his colleagues to get action in this special session uh - misses the mark.
When the president exercises his veto power, he has to have the people upo- behind him, not just a third of the Congress.
Because let's consider it.
If the majority of the members of the Congress felt that these particular proposals were good issues - the majority of those who were Democrats - why didn't they pass them and send to the President and get a veto and have an issue?
The reason why these particular bills in these various fields that have been mentioned were not passed was not because the President was against them; it was because the people were against them.
It was because they were too extreme.
And I am convinced that the alternate proposals that I have, that the Republicans have in the field of health, in the field of education, in the field of welfare, because they are not extreme, because they will accomplish the end uh - without too great cost in dollars or in freedom, that they could get through the next Congress.
 Well, now let's look at these bills that the Vice President suggests were too extreme.
One was a bill for a dollar twenty-five cents an hour for anyone who works in a store or company that has a million dollars a year business.
I don't think that's extreme at all; and yet nearly two-thirds to three-fourths of the Republicans in the House of Representatives voted against that proposal.
Secondly was the federal aid to education bill.
It - it was a very uh - because of the defeat of teacher salaries, it was not a bill that uh - met in my opinion the need.
The fact of the matter is it was a bill that was less than you recommended, Mr. Nixon, this morning in your proposal.
It was not an extreme bill and yet we could not get one Republican to join, at least I think four of the eight Democrats voted to send it to the floor of the House - not one Republican - and they joined with those Democrats who were opposed to it.
I don't say the Democrats are united in their support of the program.
But I do say a majority are.
And I say a majority of the Republicans are opposed to it.
The third is medical care for the aged which is tied to Social Security, which is financed out of Social Security funds.
It does not put a deficit on the Treasury.
The proposal advanced by you and by Mr. Javits would have cost six hundred millions of dollars - Mr. Rockefeller rejected it in New York, said he didn't agree with the financing at all, said it ought to be on Social Security.
So these are three programs which are quite moderate.
I think it shows the difference between the two parties.
One party is ready to move in these programs.
The other party gives them lip service.
 Well, I think they're serious.
I think it's a matter that we should continue to uh - give uh - great care and attention to.
We should support uh - the laws which the United States has passed in order to protect us from uh - those who would destroy us from within.
We should sustain uh - the Department of Justice in its efforts and the F.B.I., and we should be continually alert.
I think if the United States is maintaining a strong society here in the United States, I think that we can meet any internal threat.
The major threat is external and will continue.
 I agree with Senator Kennedy's appraisal generally in this respect.
The question of Communism within the United States has been one that has worried us in the past.
It is one that will continue to be a problem for years to come.
We have to remember that the cold war that Mr. Khrushchev is waging and his colleagues are waging, is waged all over the world and it's waged right here in the United States.
That's why we have to continue to be alert.
It is also essential in being alert that we be fair; fair because by being fair we uphold the very freedoms that the Communists would destroy.
We uphold the standards of conduct which they would never follow.
And, in this connection, I think that uh - we must look to the future having in mind the fact that we fight Communism at home not only by our laws to deal with Communists uh - the few who do become Communists and the few who do become tra- fellow travelers, but we also fight Communism at home by moving against those various injustices which exist in our society which the Communists feed upon.
And in that connection I again would say that while Senator Kennedy says we are for the status quo, I do believe that he uh - would agree that I am just as sincere in believing that my proposals for federal aid to education, my proposals for health care are just as sincerely held as his.
The question again is not one of goals - we're for those goals - it's one of means.
 Not at all.
As a matter of fact your question brings out a point that I am very glad to make.
Too often in appraising whether we are moving ahead or not we think only of what the federal government is doing.
Now that isn't the test of whether America moves.
The test of whether America moves is whether the federal government, plus the state government, plus the local government, plus the biggest segment of all - individual enterprise - moves.
We have for example a gross national product of approximately five hundred billion dollars.
Roughly a hundred billion to a hundred and a quarter billion of that is the result of government activity.
Four hundred billion, approximately, is a result of what individuals do.
Now, the reason the Eisenhower Administration has moved, the reason that we've had the funds, for example, locally to build the schools, and the hospitals, and the highways, to make the progress that we have, is because this Administration has encouraged individual enterprise; and it has resulted in the greatest expansion of the private sector of the economy that has ever been witnessed in an eight-year period.
And that is growth.
That is the growth that we are looking for; it is the growth that this Administration has supported and that its policies have stimulated.
 Well, I must say that the reason that the schools have been constructed is because the local school districts were willing to increase the property taxes to a tremendously high figure - in my opinion, almost to the point of diminishing returns in order to sustain these schools.
Secondly, I think we have a rich uh - country.
And I think we have a powerful country.
I think what we have to do, however, is have the president and the leadership set before our country exactly what we must do in the next decade, if we're going to maintain our security in education, in economic growth, in development of natural resources.
The Soviet Union is making great gains.
It isn't enough to compare what might have been done eight years ago, or ten years ago, or fifteen years ago, or twenty years ago.
I want to compare what we're doing with what our adversaries are doing, so that by the year 1970 the United States is ahead in education, in health, in building, in homes, in economic strength.
I think that's the big assignment, the big task, the big function of the federal government.
 Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Senator Kennedy.
First of all, I think it is well to put in perspective where we really do stand with regard to the Soviet Union in this whole matter of growth.
The Soviet Union has been moving faster than we have.
But the reason for that is obvious.
They start from a much lower base.
Although they have been moving faster in growth than we have, we find, for example, today that their total gross national product is only forty-four per cent of our total gross national product.
That's the same percentage that it was twenty years ago.
And as far as the absolute gap is concerned, we find that the United States is even further ahead than it was twenty years ago.
Is this any reason for complacency?
Not at all Because these are determined men.
They are fanatical men.
And we have to get the very most of uh - out uh - out of our economy.
I agree with Senator Kennedy completely on that score.
Where we disagree is in the means that we would use to get the most out of our economy.
I respectfully submit that Senator Kennedy too often would rely too much on the federal government, on what it would do to solve our problems, to stimulate growth.
I believe that when we examine the Democratic platform, when we examine the proposals that he has discussed tonight, when we compare them with the proposals that I have made, that these proposals that he makes would not result in greater growth for this country than would be the case if we followed the programs that I have advocated.
There are many of the points that he has made that I would like to comment upon.
The one in the field of health is worth mentioning.
Our health program - the one that Senator Javits and other Republican Senators, as well as I supported - is one that provides for all people over sixty-five who want health insurance, the opportunity to have it if they want it.
It provides a choice of having either government insurance or private insurance.
But it compels nobody to have insurance who does not want it.
His program under Social Security, would require everybody who had Social Security to take government health insurance whether he wanted it or not.
And it would not cover several million people who are not covered by Social Security at all.
Here is one place where I think that our program does a better job than his.
The other point that I would make is this: this downgrading of how much things cost I think many of our people will understand better when they look at what happened when - during the Truman Administration when the government was spending more than it took in - we found savings over a lifetime eaten up by inflation.
We found the people who could least afford it - people on retired incomes uh - people on fixed incomes - we found them unable to meet their bills at the end of the month.
It is essential that a man who's president of this country certainly stand for every program that will mean for growth.
And I stand for programs that will mean growth and progress.
But it is also essential that he not allow a dollar spent that could be better spent by the people themselves.
 The point was made by Mr. Nixon that the Soviet production is only forty-four percent of ours.
I must say that forty-four percent and that Soviet country is causing us a good deal of trouble tonight.
I want to make sure that it stays in that relationship.
I don't want to see the day when it's sixty percent of ours, and seventy and seventy-five and eighty and ninety percent of ours, with all the force and power that it could bring to bear in order to cause our destruction.
Secondly, the Vice President mentioned medical care for the aged.
Our program was an amendment to the Kerr bill.
The Kerr bill provided assistance to all those who were not on Social Security.
I think it's a very clear contrast.
In 1935, when the Social Security Act was written, ninety-four out of ninety-five Republicans voted against it.
Mr. Landon ran in 1936 to repeal it.
In August of 1960, when we tried to get it again, but this time for medical care, we received the support of one Republican in the Senate on this occasion.
Thirdly, I think the question before the American people is: as they look at this country and as they look at the world around them, the goals are the same for all Americans.
The means are at question.
The means are at issue.
If you feel that everything that is being done now is satisfactory, that the relative power and prestige and strength of the United States is increasing in relation to that of the Communists; that we've b- gaining more security, that we are achieving everything as a nation that we should achieve, that we are achieving a better life for our citizens and greater strength, then I agree.
I think you should vote for Mr. Nixon.
But if you feel that we have to move again in the sixties, that the function of the president is to set before the people the unfinished business of our society as Franklin Roosevelt did in the thirties, the agenda for our people - what we must do as a society to meet our needs in this country and protect our security and help the cause of freedom.
As I said at the beginning, the question before us all, that faces all Republicans and all Democrats, is: can freedom in the next generation conquer, or are the Communists going to be successful?
That's the great issue.
And if we meet our responsibilities I think freedom will conquer.
If we fail, if we fail to move ahead, if we fail to develop sufficient military and economic and social strength here in this country, then I think that uh - the tide could begin to run against us.
And I don't want historians, ten years from now, to say, these were the years when the tide ran out for the United States.
I want them to say these were the years when the tide came in; these were the years when the United States started to move again.
That's the question before the American people, and only you can decide what you want, what you want this country to be, what you want to do with the future.
I think we're ready to move.
And it is to that great task, if we're successful, that we will address ourselves.
 Yes.
First of all is to recognize a tremendous economic strength in this country and to set the putting to - back to work of our people as a top priority.
This is uh - an effort that ought to be done primarily by strong leadership in the White House, the inspiration of our people, the tapping of uh - business, agriculture, industry, labor and government at all levels to work on this uh project.
We'll never have uh - an end to the inflationary spiral, and we'll never have a balanced budget until we get our people back to work.
There are several things that can be done specifically that are not now being done.
First of all, to channel research and development funds into areas that will provide uh large numbers of jobs.
Secondly, we need to have a commitment in the uh private sector uh - to cooperate with government in matters like housing.
Here a very small investment of taxpayer's money - in the housing field can bring large numbers of extra jobs, and the guarantee of mortgage loans, and the uh - putting forward of uh - two-0-two programs for housing for older people and so forth to cut down the roughly 20 percent unemployment that now exists in the - in the construction industry.
Another thing is to deal with our - uh needs in the central cities, where the unemployment rate is extremely high: sometimes among minority groups, or those who don't speak English, or who're black, or young people, or - 40 percent of the employment.
Here a CCC type program would be appropriate to channel money into the ah - cha- in - in into the sharing with the private sector and also local and state governments to employ young people who are now out of work.
Another very important - uh aspect of our - uh economy would be to increase production in every way possible, uh to hold down - uh taxes on individuals, and to uh shift the tax burdens onto those who have avoided paying taxes in the past.
These uh - kinds of specific things, uh none of which are being done now, would be a great help in - in reducing uh unemployment.
There is uh - uh an additional factor that needs to be done and covered very - very succinctly, and that is, to make sure that we have a good relationship between management - business on the one hand, and labor, on the other.
In a > Transfer interrupted!
ery high, we might channel specific uh targeted job - job - uh opportunities by paying part of the salary of unemployed people - uh and also sharing with uh - local governments the uh - payment of salaries which would uh - let us cut down the unemployment rate much lower, before we hit the inflationary level.
But I believe that by the end of the first four years of uh - of the next term we could have the unemployment down to 3 percent adult unemployment, which is about uh - 4 to 4 and a half percent overall uh controlled inflation rate and have a uh balance of growth of about - uh 4 to 6 percent, around 5 percent which would give us a balanced budget.
 Yes, in unemployment that is likely to create additional pressure on prices, how willing are you to consider an incomes policy, in other words, wage and price controls?
 Well - we now have such uh - a low utilization of uh - our productive capacity - uh about 73 percent; I think it's about the lowest since the Great Depression years - and such a high unemployment rate now - uh 7.9 percent - that - uh we have a long way to go in getting people to work before we have the inflationary pressures.
And I think this would uh - this would be uh easy to accomplish, to get jobs down, without having strong in- inflationary pressures that - that would be necessary.
I would not favor the uh - payment of uh - of a given fixed income to people unless they are not able to work.
But with tax incentives for the low-income groups we could build up their uh - income levels uh - above the poverty level and not uh make welfare more uh - profitable than - than work.
 I don't believe that uh that Mr. Carter's been any more specific in this case than he has been on many other instances.
I notice particularly that he didn't endorse the Humphrey-Hawkins bill which he has on occasions and which is included as a part of the Democratic platform.
That legislation uh allegedly would help our unemployment, but uh - we all know that it would've controlled our economy, it would've added uh - ten to thirty billion dollars each year in additional expenditures by the Federal Government.
It would've called for export controls on agricultural products In my judgment the best way to get jobs is to uh - expand the private sector, where five out of six jobs today exist in our economy.
We can do that by reducing Federal taxes as I proposed uh - about a year ago when I called for a tax reduction of $28 billion - three-quarters of it to go to private uh taxpayers and uh one-quarter to the business sector.
We could add to jobs in the major metropolitan areas by a proposal that I recommended that would give tax incentives to business to move into the inner city and to expand or to build new plants so that they would take a plant, or expand a plant where people are, and people are currently unemployed.
We could uh - also uh - help our youths with some of the proposals that uh - would give to young people an opportunity to work and learn at the same time just like we give money to young people who are going to college.
Those are the kind of specifics that I think we have to discuss on these uh - debates, and these are the kind of programs that I'll talk about on my time.
 At the time, Mr. Gannon, that I made the recommendation for a $28 billion tax cut - three-quarters of it to go to individual taxpayers and 25 percent to American business.
I said at the time that we had to hold the lid an federal spending, that for every dollar of a tax reduction we had to have an equal reduction in federal expenditures - a one-for-one proposition.
And I recommended that to the Congress with a budget ceiling of three hundred and ninety-five billion dollars, and that would have permitted us to have a $25 billion tax reduction.
In my tax reduction program for middle-income taxpayers, I recommended that the Congress increase personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty dollars per person to one thousand dollars per person.
That would mean, of course, that for a family of four that that family would have a thousand dollars more personal exemption - money that they could spend for their own purposes, money that the government wouldn't have to spend.
But if we keep the lid on federal spending, which I think we can - with the help of the Congress, we can justify fully a $28 billion tax reduction.
In the budget that I submitted to the Congress in January this year, I re- recommended a 50 percent cutback in the rate of growth of federal spending.
For the last ten years the budget of the United States has grown from uh - about 11 percent per year.
We can't afford that kind of growth in federal spending.
And in the budget that I recommended we cut it in half - a growth rate of 5 to 5 and one-half percent.
With that kind of limitation, on federal spending, we can fully justify the tax reductions that I have proposed.
And it seems to me with the stimulant of more money in the hands of the taxpayers, and with more money in the hands of business to expand, to modernize, to provide more jobs, our economy stimulated so that we'll get more revenue and we'll have a more prosperous economy.
 That tax bill does not entirely meet the criteria that I established.
I think the Congress should have uh - added another $10 billion reduction in personal income taxes, including the increase of personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty to a thousand dollars.
And Congress could have done that if the budget committees of the Congress, and the Congress as a whole, had not increased the spending that I recommended in the budget.
I'm sure that you know that in the resolutions passed by the Congress, that have added about $17 billion in more spending, by the Congress over the budget that I recommended.
So I would prefer in that tax bill to have an additional tax cut and a further limitation on federal spending.
Now this tax bill - that hasn't reached the White House yet, but is expected in a day or two - it's about fifteen hundred pages.
It has some good provisions in it.
It has - uh left out some that I have recommended, unfortunately.
On the other hand, uh when you have a bill of that magnitude, with - tho- those many provisions, a president has to sit and decide if there's more good than bad.
And from the a- analysis that I've made so far, it seems to me that that tax bill does uh - justify my signature and my approval.
 Well, Mr. Ford is - is uh changing uh considerably his previous philosophy.
The present tax structure is a disgrace to this country; it's just a welfare program for the rich.
As a matter of fact, uh - 25 percent of the total tax deductions, go for only 1 percent of the richest people in this country, and over 50 percent of the tax uh credits go for the 14 percent of the richest people in this country.
When Mr. Ford first became president in - in August of 1974, the first thing he did in - in October was to ask for a $4.7 billion increase in taxes on our people in the midst of the heaviest recession, since uh - since the great depression of nineteen uh - of the 1940s.
In uh - January of 1975 he asked for a tax change: a $5.6 billion increase on low-and-middle-income private individuals, a six and a half billion dollar decrease on the corporations and the special interests.
In uh - December of uh - 1975 he vetoed the roughly 18 to 20 billion dollar uh tax-reduction bill that had been passed by the Congress, and then he came back later on in January of this year and he did advocate a $10 billion tax reduction, but it would be offset by a $6 billion increase this coming January in deductions for Social Security payments and for unemployment compensation.
The whole philosophy of the Republican party, including uh - my opponent, has been to pile on taxes on low-income people to take 'em off on the corporations.
As a matter fact, in - sin- since the late sixties when Mr. Nixon took office, we've had a reduction in uh - in the percentage of taxes paid by corporations from 30 percent down to about 20 percent.
We've had an increase in taxes paid by individuals, payroll taxes, from14 Percent up to 20 percent.
And this is what the Republicans have done to us.
And this is why a tax reform is so important.
 Well, as a matter of fact there is.
If we assume the ah - uh - a rate of growth of our economy, equivalent to what it was during President Johnson, President Kennedy, even before the - the - the - uh wa uh - Vietnese- namese War, and if we assume that at the end of the four-year period we can cut our unemployment rate down to 4 to 4 and a half percent - under those circumstances, even assuming no elimination of unnecessary programs and assuming an increase in the ad- in the allotment of money to finance programs, increasing as the inflation rate does - my economic projections, I think confirmed by the House uh - and the Senate committees, have been with the $60 billion extra amount of money that can be spent in fiscal year '81 which will be the last year of this next term.
Within that sixty-billion dollars increase there would be fit the programs that I promised the American people.
I might say too, that - that if we see that these goals cannot be reached - and I believe they're reasonable goals - then I would cut back on the rate of implement- implementation of new programs in order to accommodate a balanced budget by fiscal year '81 which is the last year of the next term.
I believe that we ought to have a balanced budget during normal economic circumstances.
And uh - these projections have been very carefully made.
I stand behind them.
And if they should be in error slightly on the down side, then I'll phase in the programs that we've uh - advocated, more slowly.
 Well, the uh - the assumption that - that you uh - have described as different is in the rate of growth of our economy.
 I believe that it's accurate to say that - that the - that the committees to whom you refer with the - the employment that you uh - state, and with the 5 to 5 and a half percent growth rate in our economy, that the uh - projections would be a uh - a $60 billion increase in the amount of money that we'd have to spend in l981 compared to now.
And uh - with that uh - in that framework would befit the - any improvements in the programs.
Now this does not include uh - any uh - uh extra control over uh unnecessary spending, the weeding out of obsolete or obsolescent programs.
Uh - we'll have uh - a safety version built in with complete reorganization of the executive branch of government which I am pledged to do.
The present bureaucratic structure of the - of the Federal Government is a mess.
And if I'm elected president that's gonna be a top priority of mine to completely revise the structure of the federal government, to make it economical, efficient, purposeful and manageable for a change.
And also, I'm going to institute zero-based budgeting which I used four years in Georgia, which uh - assesses every program every year, and eliminates those programs that are obsolete or obsolescent.
But with these projections, we will have a balanced budget by fiscal year 1981, if I'm elected president.
Keep my promises to the American people.
And it's just predicated on very modest, but I think accurate, projections of employment increases and uh - a growth in our national economy equal to what was experienced under Kennedy, Johnson, before the Vietnam War.
 If it is uh true that there will be a $60 billion surplus by fiscal year 1981, rather than spend that money for all the new programs that Governor Carter recommends and endorses, and which are included in the Democratic platform, I think the American taxpayer ought to get an additional tax break - a tax reduction of that magnitude.
I feel that the taxpayers are the ones that need the relief: I don't think we should add additional programs of the magnitude that Governor Carter talks about.
It seems to me that our tax structure today has rates that are too high.
But I am uh - very glad to point out that since 1969, during a Republican administrations, we have had ten million people taken off of the tax rolls at the lower end of the taxpayer area.
And at the same time, assuming that I sign the tax bill that was mentioned by Mr. Gannon, we will in the last two tax bills have increased the minimum tax on all wealthy taxpayers.
And I believe that by eliminating ten million taxpayers in the last uh eight years, and by putting a heavier tax burden on those in the higher tax brackets, plus the other actions that've been taken uh - we can give taxpayers adequate tax relief.
Now it seems to me that uh - as we look at the recommendations of the budget committees and our own projections, there isn't going to be any $60 billion dividend.
I've heard of those dividends in the past; it always happens.
We expected one at the time of the Vietnam War, but it was used up before we ever ended the war and taxpayers never got the adequate relief they deserved.
 The amnesty program that I recommended in Chicago in September of 1974 would give to all draft evaders and - uh military deserters the opportunity to earn their uh - good record back.
About fourteen to fifteen thousand did take advantage of that program.
We gave them ample time.
I am against- an across-the-board pardon of draft evaders or military deserters.
Now in the case of Mr. Nixon, the reason the - the pardon was given, was that, when I took office this country was in a very, very divided condition.
There was hatred, there was divisiveness - uh people had lost faith in their government in many, many respects.
Mr. Nixon resigned, and I became president.
It seemed to me that if I was to uh adequately and effectively handle the problems of high inflation, a growing recession, the uh - involvement of the United States still in Vietnam that I had to give a hundred percent of my time to those two major problems.
Mr. Nixon resigned.
That is disgrace.
The first President out of thirty-eight that ever resigned from public office under pressure.
So when you look at the penalty that he paid, and when you analyze the requirements that I had - to spend all of my time working on the economy, which was in trouble, that I inherited; working on our problems in Southeast Asia - which were still plaguing us - it seemed to me that Mr. Nixon had been penalized enough by his resignation in disgrace and the need, and necessity for me to concentrate on the problems of the country fully justified the action that I took.
 Well, Mr. Carter has uh indicated that uh - he would give a blanket pardon to all uh - draft evaders.
I do not agree with that point of view.
I gave, in September of 1974, an opportunity for all draft evaders, all deserters, to come in voluntarily, clear their records by earning an opportunity to restore their good citizenship.
I think we gave them a good opportunity - we're - I don't think we should go any further.
 Well I think it's uh... very difficult for President Ford to uh - explain the difference between the pardon of President Nixon and - and uh - his attitude toward those who violated the draft laws.
As a matter of fact - now- I don't advocate amnesty; I advocate pardon.
There's a difference in my opinion - uh and in accordance with the ruling of the Supreme Court and accordance with the definition in the dictionary.
Amnesty means that - that you uh - that what you did was right.
Pardon means that what you did, whether it's right or wrong, you're forgiven for it.
And I do advocate a pardon for - for draft evaders.
I think it's accurate to say that in uh - two years ago when Mr. Nixon - Mr. Ford put in this uh amnesty that three times as many deserters were uh - excused as were - as were the uh - the ones who evaded the draft.
But I think that now is the time to heal our country after the Vietnam War and I think that what the people are concerned about is not the - uh pardon or the amnesty of uh - those who evaded the draft, but - but whether or not our crime system is - is fair.
We've got a - a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime - the - the - the big shots who are rich, who are influential uh very seldom go to jail; those who are poor and - and who have uh no influence - uh quite often are the ones who are punished.
And - and the whole uh subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much, and I believe that the fairness of it is - is what - uh - is a - is a major problem that addresses our - our leader and this is something that hasn't been addressed adequately by - by this administration.
But I - I hope to have a complete uh responsibility on my shoulders to help bring about a - a fair uh - criminal justice system and also to - to bring about uh - an end to the - to the divise- divisiveness that has occurred in our country uh as a result of the Vietnam War.
 Well, I've been through this before, Mr. Gannon, as the governor of Georgia.
When I took aver we had uh a bureaucratic mess, like we have in Washington now, and we had three hundred agencies, departments, bureaus, commissions - uh some uh - fully budgeted, some not, but all having responsibility to carry out that was in conflict.
And we cut those three hundred - uh agencies and so forth down substantially.
We eliminated two hundred and seventy-eight of them.
We set up a simple structure of government that could be administrated fairly and it was a - a tremendous success.
It hasn't been undone since I was there.
It resulted also in an ability to reshape our court system, our prison system, our education system, our mental health programs and - and a clear assignment of responsibility and - and authority and also to have uh our people once again understanding control our government.
I intend to do the same thing if I'm elected president.
When I get to Washington, coming in as an outsider, one of the major responsibilities that - that I will have on my shoulder is a complete reorganization of the - of the executive branch of government.
We now have uh - a greatly expanded White House staff.
When Mr. Nixon went in office, for instance, we had three and a half million dollars spent on - on the White House and its staff.
That has escalated now to sixteen and a half million dollars, in the last uh Republican administration.
This needs to be changed.
We need to put the responsibilities back on the cabinet members.
We also need to have a great reduction in agencies and programs.
For instance, we now have uh - in the health area three hundred and two different programs administered by eleven major departments and agencies, sixty other advisory commissions responsible for this.
Medicaid's in one agency; Medicare is in a different one.
The - the check on the quality of health care is in a different one.
None of them uh are responsible for health care itself.
This makes it almost impossible for us to have a good health program.
We have uh - just advocated uh - this past week a consolidation of the responsibilities for energy.
Our country now has no comprehensive energy program or policy.
We have twenty different agencies in the federal government responsible for the production, the regulation, the uh - information about energy, the conservation of energy, spread all over government.
This is a - a gross waste of money, so tough, competent management of government, giving us a simple efficient purposeful and manageable government would be a great step forward and if I'm elected - and I intend to be - then it's gonna be done.
 I can't say for sure that we would have fewer federal employees when I go out of office than when I come in.
It took me about three years to completely reorganize the Georgia government.
The last year I was in office uh - our budget was - was actually less than it was a year before, uh which showed a great uh improvement.
Also, we had a - a 2 percent increase in the number of employees the last year.
But it was a tremendous shift from administrative jobs into the delivery of services.
For instance, we uh - completely revised our prison system.
We established eighty-four new mental health treatment centers.
And we shifted people out of administrative jobs into the field to deliver better services.
The same thing will be done uh - at the federal government level.
I - I accomplished this with s - substantial reductions in employees in some departments.
For instance, in the Transportation Department uh we had uh - we cut back about 25 percent of the total number of employees.
In giving our people better mental health care, we increased the number of employees.
But the efficiency of it, the simplicity of it, the uh ability of people to understand their own government and control it was a - was a uh - substantial benefit derived from complete reorganization.
We uh - have got to do that at the federal government level.
If we don't, the bureaucratic mess is going to continue.
There's no way for our people now to understand what their government is.
There's no way to get the answer to a question.
When you come to Washington to try to - as a governor - to try to begin a new program for your people, like uh the treatment of drug addicts, I found there were thirteen different federal agencies that I had to go to, to manage the uh drug treatment program.
In the Georgia government we only had one agency responsible for drug treatment.
This is the kind of change that would be made.
And uh - it would be of - of tremendous benefit in long-range planning, in tight budgeting, uh saving the taxpayers' money, making the government more efficient, cutting down on bureaucratic waste, having a clear delineation of authority and responsibility of employees, and giving our people a better chance to understand and control their government.
 I think the record should show, Mr. Newman, that uh - the Bureau of Census - we checked it just yesterday - indicates that uh - in the four years that uh - Governor Carter was governor of the state of Georgia, uh - expenditures by the government went up over 50 percent Uh - employees of the government in Georgia during his term of office went up over 25 percent; and the figures also show that the uh, uh - bonded indebtedness of the state of Georgia during his governorship went up over 20 percent.
And there was some very interesting testimony given by Governor Carter's successor, Governor Busby, before a Senate committee a few uh - months ago on how he found the Medicaid program when he came into office following Governor Carter.
He testified, and these are his words - the present governor of Georgia - he says he found the Medicaid program in Georgia in shambles.
Now let me talk about what we've done in the White House as far as federal employees are concerned The first order that I issued after I became president was to cut or eliminate the prospective forty-thousand increase in federal employees that had been scheduled by my predecessor.
And in the term that I've been president - some two years - we have reduced federal employment by eleven thousand.
In the White House staff itself, when I became president, we had roughly five hundred and forty employees.
We now have about four hundred and eighty-five employees, so we've made a rather significant reduction in the number of employees on the White House staff working for the president.
So I think our record of cutting back employees, plus the failure on the part of the Governor's programs to actually save employment in Georgia, shows which is the better plan.
 Well, in the uh - last two years, as I indicated before, we had a very tough time.
We were faced with uh - heavy inflation, over 12 percent; we were faced with substantial unemployment.
But in the last uh - twenty-four months we've turned the economy around and we've brought inflation down to under 6 percent, and we have reduced the uh - well, we have added employment of about four million in the last seventeen months to the point where we have eighty-eight million people working in America today - the most in the history of the country.
The net result is we are going to have some improvement in our receipts.
And I think we'll have some decrease in our disbursements.
We expect to have a lower deficit in fiscal year 1978.
We feel that with this improvement in the economy; we feel with more receipts and fewer disbursements we can in a moderate way increase, as I recommended, over the next ten years a new parks program that would cast a billion and a half dollars, doubling our national park system.
We have recommended that in the h- housing program we can reduce down payments and moderate monthly payments.
But that doesn't cost any more as far as the federal treasury is concerned.
We believe that we can uh do a better job in the area of crime, but that requires a tougher sentencing, mandatory certain prison sentences for those who violate our criminal laws.
We - uh believe that uh you can revise the federal criminal code, which has not been revised in a good many years.
That doesn't cost any more money.
We believe that you can uhh - do something more effectively with a moderate increase in money in the drug abuse program.
We feel that uh - in education we can have a slight increase - not a major increase.
It's my understanding that Governor Carter has indicated that uh - he approves of a $30 billion uh - expenditure by the federal government as far as education is concerned.
At the present time we're spending roughly three billion five hundred million dollars.
I don't know where that money would come from.
But as we look at the quality-of-life programs - jobs, health, education, crime, recreation - we feel that as we move forward with a healthier economy, we can absorb the small necessary cost that will be required.
 We feel that uh - with the programs that I have recommended, the additional $10 billion tax cut, with the moderate increases in the quality-of-life area, we can still have a balanced budget which I will submit to the Congress in January of 1978.
We won't wait one year or two years longer, as Governor Carter uh - indicates.
As the economy improves, and it is improving, our gross national product this year will average about 6 percent increase over last year.
We will have the lower rate of inflation for the uh - calendar year this year - something slightly under 6 percent.
Employment will be up, revenues will be up.
We'll keep the lid on some of these programs that we can hold down as we have a little extra money to spend for those quality-of-life programs which I think are needed and necessary.
Now I cannot, and would not, endorse the kind of program that uh - Governor Carter recommends.
He endorses the Democratic uh - platform which, as I read it, calls for approximately sixty additional programs.
We estimate that those programs would add a hundred billion dollars minimum and probably two hundred billion dollars - uhh maximum each year to the federal budget.
Those programs you cannot afford and give tax relief.
We feel that you can hold the line and restrain federal spending, give a tax reduction and still have a balanced budget by 1978.
 Well, Mr. Ford takes the uh - same attitude that the Republicans always take.
In the last three months before an election, they're always for the programs that they always fight the other three-and-one-half years.
Uh - I remember when uh - Herbert Hoover was against uh - jobs for people.
I remember when Alf Landon was against Social Security and uh - later President Nixon, sixteen years ago, was telling the public that John Kennedy's proposals would bankrupt the country and would double the cost.
The best thing to do is to look at the record uh - of Mr. Ford's Administration and Mr. Nixon's before his.
Uh - we had last year a $65 billion deficit - the largest deficit in the history of our country - more of a deficit spending than we had in the entire eight-year period under President Johnson and President Kennedy.
We've got five hundred thousand more Americans out of jobs today than were out of work three months ago and since Mr. Ford's been in office two years, we've had a 50 percent increase in unemployment from five million people out of work to two and a half million more people out of work and a total of seven and a half million.
We've also got uh - a comparison between himself and Mr. Nixon.
He's got four times the size of the deficits that Mr. Nixon even had himself.
This uh - talking about more people at work - uh is distorted because with a 14 percent increase in the cost of living in the last uh - two years, it means that - that women and young people have had to go to work when they didn't want to because their fathers didn't make enough to pay the increased cost of uh - food and uh housing and clothing.
We have uh - in this last uh two years alone a hundred and twenty billion dollars total deficits under President Ford and uh - at the same time we've had, in the last eight years, a doubling in the number of bankruptcies for small business: we've had a negative growth in our - in our national economy measured in real dollars.
The take-home pay of a worker in this country is actually less now than it was in 1968 - measured in real dollars.
This is the kind of record that's there and talk about the future and a drastic change or conversion on the part of Mr. Ford as of last minute is one that just doesn't go.
 Well among my other experiences in the past, I've - I've been a nuclear engineer, and did graduate work in this field.
I think I know the - the uh capabilities and limitations of atomic power.
But the energy - uh policy of our nation is one that uh has not yet been established under this administration.
I think almost every other developed nation in the world has an energy policy except us.
We have seen uh - the Federal Energy Agency established, for instance.
Uh - in the crisis of 1973 it was supposed to be a temporary agency, uh now it's permanent, it's enormous, it's growing every day.
I think the Wall Street Journal uh reported not too long ago they have a hundred and twelve public relations experts working for the Federal Energy Agency to try to justify to the American people its own existence.
We've got to have a - a firm way to handle the energy question.
The reorganization proposal that I have put forward is one uh first step.
In addition to that, we need to have - uh a realization that we've got uh about thirty-five years worth of oil left in the whole world.
We're gonna run out of oil.
When Mr. Nixon made his famous uh speech on Operation Independence we were importing about 35 percent of our oil.
Now we've increased that amount 25 percent.
We now import about 44 percent of our oil.
We need to shift from oil to coal.
We need to concentrate our research and development effort on uh coal burning and extraction, with safer mines, but also it's clean burning.
We need to shift very strongly toward solar energy and have strict conservation measures.
And then as a last resort only, continue to use atomic power.
I would certainly uh - not cut out atomic power altogether.
We can't afford to give up that opportunity until later.
But to the extent that we continue to use atomic power, I would be responsible as president to make sure that the safety precautions were initiated and maintained.
For instance, some that have been forgotten; we need to have the reactor core - below ground level, the entire power plant that uses atomic uh - power tightly sealed and a heavy - heavy vacuum maintained.
There ought to be a standardized design.
There ought to be a full-time uh - atomic energy specialist, independent of the power company in the control room, full time, twenty-four hours a day, to shut down a plant if an abnormality develops.
These kinds of uh - procedures, along with evacuation procedures, adequate insurance, ought to be initiated.
So, shift from oil to coal, emphasize research and development on coal use and also on solar power, strict conservation measures, not yield every time that the special interest groups uh - put pressure on the president like uh this administration has done, and use atomic energy only as a last resort with the strictest possible safety precautions.
That's the best overall energy policy in the brief time we have to discuss it.
 Yes, I would.
Some of the things that can be done about this is a change in the rate structure of electric power companies.
We uh - now encourage people to waste electricity, and uh - by giving uh - the lowest rates to the biggest users.
We don't do anything to cut down on peak load requirements.
We don't have an adequate requirement for the insulation of homes, for the efficiency of automobiles.
And whenever the uh - automobile manufacturers come forward and say they can't meet the uh - amendments that the Congress has put forward, this Republican administration has delayed the implementation dates.
In addition to that, we ought to have a - a shift toward the use of coal, particularly in the Appalachian regions where the coal is located.
A lot of uh - very high quality, low-carbon coal, uh - low-sulfur coal is there, it's where our employment is needed.
Uh - this would - would help a great deal.
So mandatory conservation measures - yes.
Encouragement by the president for people to uh voluntarily conserve - yes.
And also the private sector ought to be encouraged to - to bring forward to the public the benefits from efficiency.
One bank in uh - Washington, fo- for instance, gives lower interest loans for people who adequately insulate their homes or who buy efficient automobiles.
And some major uh - uh - manufacturing companies, like Dow Chemical, have through uh - very effective efficiency mechanism cut down the use of energy by uh - as much as 40 percent with the same out-product.
These kinds of things uh - ought to be done, uh they ought to be encouraged and supported, and even required uh by the government, yes.
 Governor Carter skims over a very serious and a very broad subject.
In January of uh - 1975 I submitted to the Congress and to the American people the first comprehensive energy program recommended by any president.
It called for an increase in the production of energy in the United States.
It called for uh - conservation measures so that we would save the energy that we have.
If you're going to increase domestic oil and gas production - and we have to - you have to give those producers an opportunity to uh - develop their land or their wells.
I recommended to the Congress that we should increase production in this country from six hundred million tons a year to twel- a- a billion two hundred million tons by 1985.
In order to do that we have to improve our extraction of coal from the ground; we have to improve our utilization of coal - make it more efficient, make it cleaner.
In addition we uh - have to expand our research and development.
In my program for energy independence we have increased, for example, solar energy research from about $84 million a year to about a hundred and twenty million dollars a year.
We're going as fast as the experts say we should.
In nuclear power we have increased the research and development, uh - under the Energy Research and Development Agency uh - very substantially, to insure that our ener- uh - nuclear power plants are safer, that they are more efficient, and that we have adequate safeguards.
I think you have to have greater oil and gas production, more coal production, more nuclear production, and in addition you have to have energy conservation.
 The bills that I vetoed, the one for an additional $6 billion, was not a bill that would have solved our unemployment problems.
Even the proponents of it admitted that no more than four hundred thousand jobs would be uh - made available.
Our analysis indicates that something in the magnitude of about one hundred fifty to two hundred thousand jobs would uh - be made available.
Each one of those jobs would've cost the taxpayers $25 thousand.
In addition, the jobs would not be available right now.
They would not have materialized for about nine to eighteen months.
The immediate problem we have is to stimulate our economy now so that we can get rid of unemployment.
What we have done is to hold the lid on spending in an effort to reduce the rate of inflation.
And we have proven, I think very conclusively, that you can reduce the rate of inflation and increase jobs.
For example, as I have said, we have added some four million jobs in the last seventeen months.
We have now employed eighty-eight million people in America, the largest number in the history of the United States.
We've added five hundred thousand jobs in the last two months.
Inflation is the quickest way to destroy jobs.
And by holding the lid on federal spending we have been able to do an- a good job, an affirmative job in inflation and as a result have added to the jobs in this country.
I think it's uh - also appropriate to point out that through our tax policies we have stimulated uhh - added employment throughout the country, the investment tax credit, the tax incentives for expansion and modernization of our industrial capacity.
It's my - my opinion that the private sector, where five out of six jobs are, where you have permanent jobs, with the opportunity for advancement, is a better place than make-work jobs under the program recommended by the Congress.
 Well, that bill has not yet come down to the Oval Office, so I am not in a position to make any judgment on it tonight.
But that is an extra $4 billion that would uh - add to the deficit which would add to the inflationary pressures, which would help to destroy jobs in the private sector - not make jobs, where the jobs really are.
These make-work, temporary jobs - dead end as they are - are not the kind of jobs that we want for our people.
I think it's interesting to point out that uh - in the uh - two years that I've been president I've vetoed fifty-six bills.
Congress has sustained forty-two vetoes.
As a result, we have saved over $9 billion in federal expenditures.
And the Congress by overriding the bills that I did veto, the Congress has added some $13 billion to the federal expenditures and to the federal deficit.
Now Governor Carter complains about the deficits that uh - uh - this administration has had.
And yet he condemns the vetoes that I have made that has - that have saved the taxpayer $9 billion and could have saved an additional $13 billion.
Now he can't have it both ways.
And therefore, it seems to me that we should hold the lid, as we have, to the best of our ability so we can stimulate the private economy and get the jobs where the jobs are - five out of six in this economy.
 Well, Mr. Ford doesn't seem to put into perspective the fact that when - when uh five hundred thousand more people are out of work than there were three months ago, while we have two and a half million more people out of work than were when he took office, that this touches human beings.
I was in uh - a city in uh - Pennsylvania not too long ago, near here, and uh - there were about four or five thousand people in the audience - it was on a - on a train trip.
And I said, "How many uh - adults here are out of work?"
About a thousand raised their hands.
Mr. Ford uh - actually has fewer people now in the private sector in non-farm jobs than when he took office.
And still he talks about - uh success.
Seven point nine percent unemployment is a terrible tragedy in this country.
He says he's learned how to match unemployment with inflation.
That's right.
We've got the highest inflation we've had in twenty-five years right now, except under this administration, and that was fifty years ago.
And we've got uh - the highest unemployment we've had uh - under Mr. Ford's administration, since the Great Depression.
This affects human beings, and - and his insensitivity in providing those people a chance to work has made this a welfare administration, and not a work administration.
He hasn't saved $9 billion with his vetoes.
There's only been uh - a net savings of $4 billion.
And the cost in unemployment compensation, welfare compensation, and lost revenues has increased $23 billion in the last two years.
This is a - a typical attitude that really causes havoc in people's lives, and then it's covered over by saying that our country has naturally got a 6 percent unemployment rate, or 7 percent unemployment rate and a 6 percent inflation.
It's a travesty.
It shows a lack of leadership.
And we've never had a president since the War between the States that vetoed more bills.
Mr. Ford has vetoed four times as many bills as Mr. Nixon - per year.
And eleven of 'em have been overridden.
One of his bills that was overridden - he only got one vote in the Senate and seven votes in the House, from Republicans.
 Right.
 Now we have uh such a grossly unbalanced tax system - as I said earlier, that it is a disgrace - ah of all the tax - benefits now, 25 percent of 'em go to the 1 percent of the richest people in this country.
Over 50 percent - 53 to be exact - percent of the tax benefits go to the 14 percent richest people in this country, and we've had a 50 percent increase in payroll deductions since Mr. Nixon went in office eight years ago.
Mr. Ford has - has advocated since he's been in office over $5 billion in reductions for corporations, special interest groups, and the very, very wealthy who derive their income - not from labor - but from investments.
That's got to be changed.
A few things that can be done: we have now a deferral system so that the multinational corporations who invest overseas - if they make a million dollars in profits overseas - they don't have to pay any of their taxes unless they bring their money back into this country.
When they don't pay their taxes, the average American pays the taxes for them.
Not only that, but it robs this country of jobs, because instead of coming back with that million dollars and creating a shoe factory, say in New Hampshire or Vermont, if the company takes the money down to Italy and - and builds a shoe factory, they don't have to pay any taxes on the money.
Another thing is a system called DISC which was originally designed, proposed by Mr. Nixon, to encourage exports.
This permits a company to create uh - a dummy corporation, to export their products, and then not to pay the full amount of taxes on them.
This costs our uh - government about uh - $1.4 billion a year.
And when those rich corporations don't pay that tax, the average American taxpayer pays it for 'em.
Another one that's uh - that's very important is the uh - is the business deductions, uh - jet airplanes, uh - first class travel, the fifty-dollar martini lunch.
The average working person can't - uh - can't take advantage of that, but the - the wealthier people - uh can.
Uh - another system is where uhh - a dentist can invest money in say, raising cattle and uh - can put in a hundred thousand dollars of his own money, borrow nine hundred thousand dollars - nine hundred mi- thousand dollars - that makes a million - and mark off a great amount of uh - of loss uh - through that procedure.
Uh - there was one example, for instance, where uh - somebody uh - produced pornographic movies.
They put in $30 thousand of their own money and got a hundred and twenty thousand dollars in tax savings.
Well, these special kinds of programs have - have robbed the average taxpayer and have benefited those who are powerful, and who can employ lobbyists, and who can have their CPAs and their lawyers to help them benefit from the roughly uh - eight thousand pages of the tax code.
The average uh American person can't do it.
You can't hire a lobbyist uh out of unemployment compensation checks.
 Yes.
You need about, according to Congressional committees on this, you need about $10 billion.
Now you listed some things - the uh - deferral on foreign income as estimated: that would save about $500 million.
DISC, you said, was about 1.4 billion.
uh - The estimate of the outside, if you eliminated all tax shelters, is 5 billion.
So where else would you raise the revenue to provide this tax relief - would you, in fact, do away with all business deductions, and what other kinds of preferences would you do away with?
 No, I wouldn't do away with all - uh business deductions.
I think that would be a - a very serious mistake.
But uh - if - if you could just do away with the ones that are unfair, you could lower taxes for everyone.
I would never do anything that would increase the taxes for those who work for a living, or who are presently required to list all their income.
What I wanna do is not to raise taxes, but to eliminate loopholes.
And this is uh - the point of my first statistics that I gave you - that - that the present tax benefits that have been carved out over a long period of years - fifty years - by sharp tax lawyers and by lobbyists have benefited just the rich.
These programs that I described to you earlier - the tax deferrals for overseas, the DISC, and the tax shelters, uh - they only apply to people in the $50 thousand-a-year bracket or up, and I think this is the very best way to approach it.
It's to make sure that everybody pays taxes on the income that they earn and make sure that you take whatever savings there is from the higher income levels and give it to the lower- and middle-income families.
 Governor Carter's answer tonight does not coincide with the answer that he gave in an interview to the Associated Press a week or so ago.
In that interview uh - Governor Carter indicated that uh - he would raise the taxes on those in the medium or middle-income brackets or higher.
Now if you uh - take the medium or middle-income taxpayer - that's about $14 thousand per person - uh - Governor Carter has indicated, publicly, in an interview that he would increase the taxes on about 50 percent of the working people of this country.
I think uh - the way to get tax equity in this country is to give tax relief to the middle-income people who have an income from roughly $8 thousand up to twenty-five or thirty thousand dollars.
They have been short-changed as we have taken ten million taxpayers off the tax rolls in the last eight years, and as we have uh - added to the minimum tax uh - provision to make all people pay more taxes.
I believe in tax equity for the middle-income taxpayer, increasing the personal exemption.
Mr. Carter wants to increase taxes for roughly half of the taxpayers of this country.
Now, the Governor has also played a little fast and loose with the facts about vetoes.
The records show that President Roosevelt vetoed an average of fifty-five bills a year.
President Truman vetoed on the average, while he was president, about thirty-eight bills a year.
I understand that Governor Carter, when he was Governor of Georgia, vetoed between thirty-five and forty bills a year.
My average in two years is twenty-six.
But in the process of that we have saved uhh - $9 billion.
And one final comment, uh - Governor Carter talks about the tax bills and all of the inequities that exist in the present law.
I must remind him the Democrats have controlled the Congress for the last twenty-two years and they wrote all the tax bills.
 There is a considerable anti-Washington feeling throughout the country.
But I think the feeling is misplaced.
In the last two years, we have restored integrity in the White House, and we've set high standards in the executive branch of the government.
The anti-Washington feeling, in my opinion, ought to be focused on the Congress of the United States.
For example, this Congress, very shortly, will spend a billion dollars a year for its housekeeping, its salaries, its expenses and the like.
It - the next Congress will probably be the first billion-dollar Congress in the history of the United States.
I don't think the American people are getting their money's worth from the majority party that run this Congress.
We, in addition, see that uh - in the last uh - four years the number of employees hired by the Congress has gone up substantial- uh much more than uh - the gross national product, much more than any other increase throughout our society.
Congress is hiring people by the droves, and the cast as a result has gone up.
And I don't see any improvement in the performance of the Congress under the present leadership.
So it seems to me instead of the anti-Washington feeling being aimed at everybody in Washington, it seems to me that the focus should be where the problem is, which is the Congress of the United States, and particularly the majority in the Congress.
They spend too much money on themselves.
They have too many employees.
There's some question about their morality.
It seems to me that in this election, the focus should not be on the executive branch but the corrections should come as the voters vote for their members of the House of Representatives or for their United States senator.
That's where the problem is and I hope there'll be some corrective action taken so we can get some new leadership in the Congress of the United States.
 Well, It seems to me that uh - we have a chance - the Republicans - to get a majority in the House of Representatives.
We will make some gains in the United States Senate.
So there will be different ratios in the House, as well as in the Senate, and as president I will be able to uh - work with that Congress.
But let me take the other side of the coin, if I might.
Supposing we had - had a Democratic Congress for the last two years and we'd had uh - Governor Carter as President.
He has, in effect, said that he would agree with all of - he would disapprove of the vetoes that I have made, and would have added significantly to expenditures and the deficit in the federal government.
I think it would be contrary to one of the basic concepts in our system of government - a system of checks and balances.
We have a Democratic Congress today, and fortunately we've had a Republican president to check their excesses with my vetoes.
If we have a Democratic Congress next year, and a president who wants to spend an additional one hundred billion dollars a year, or maybe two hundred billion dollars a year, with more programs, we will have in my judgment, greater deficits with more spending, more dangers of inflation.
I think the American people want a Republican president to check on any excesses that come out of the next Congress, if it is a Democratic Congress.
 Well, it's not a matter of uh - Republican and Democrat.
It's a matter of leadership or no leadership.
President Eisenhower worked with a Democratic Congress very well.
Even President Nixon, because he was a strong leader at least, worked with a Democratic Congress very well.
Uh - Mr. Ford has vetoed, as I said earlier, four times as many bills per year as Mr. Nixon.
Mr. Ford quite often puts forward a program just as a public relations stunt, and never tries to put it through the Congress by working with the Congress.
I think under presidents For- uh - Nixon and Eisenhower they passed about 60 to 75 percent of their legislation.
This year Mr. Ford will not pass more than 26 percent of all the legislative proposals he puts forward.
This is government by stalemate, and we've seen almost a complete breakdown in the proper relationship between the president, who represents this country, and the Congress, who collectively also represent this country.
We've had uh - Republican presidents before who've tried to run against a Democratic - uh Congress.
And I don't think it's uh - the Congress is Mr. Ford's opponent; but if uh - if - if he insists that uh - that I be responsible for the Democratic Congress, of which I'm - have not been a part, then I think it's only fair that he be responsible for the Nixon administration in its entirety, of which he was a part.
That, I think, is a good balance.
But the point is, that - that a president ought to lead this country.
Mr. Ford, so far as I know, except for avoiding another Watergate, has not accomplished one single major program for this country.
And there's been a constant squabbling between the president and the Congress, and that's not the way this country ought to be run.
I might go back to one other thing.
Mr. Ford has uh - misquoted an AP uh - news story that was in error to begin with.
That story reported several times that I would lower taxes for low and middle-income families and uh - that correction was delivered to the White House and I am sure that the president knows about this uh - correction, but he still insists uh - on repeating an erroneous statement.
 What I have said is that the president ought to have a chance to appoint a chairman of the Federal Reserve Board to have a coterminous uh term; in other words, both of 'em serve the same four - four years.
The Congress can modify the supply of money by modifying the income uh tax laws.
The president can modify the uh - economic structure of a country by public statements and general attitudes in the budget that he proposes.
The Federal Reserve has uh - an independent status that ought to be preserved; I think that Mr. uh - Burns did take a typical, erroneous Republican attitude in the 1973 year when inflation was so high.
They assumed that the uh - inflation rate was because of excessive demand and uh - therefore put into effect tight constraint on the economy, very high interest rates, which is typical also of the Republican administration, uh - tried to increase the uh - the tax uh - payments by individuals, and cut the tax payments by corporations.
I would have uh - done it opposite.
I think the uh - problem should've been addressed by increasing productivity, by having uh - put - put people back to work so they could purchase more goods, lower income taxes on individuals, perhaps raise them, if necessary, on corporations in comparison.
But uh - Mr. Burns uh - in that respect made a very serious mistake.
I would not wanna destroy the - the independence of the uh Federal Reserve - uh Board.
But I do think we ought to have a cohesive economic policy with at - at least the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and the president's terms being uh - the same and letting the Congress, of course, be the third uh - entity with uh - with independence subject only to the president's veto.
 The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board should be independent.
Fortunately, he has been during Democratic as well as Republican administrations.
As the result in the last uh - two years uh - we have had a responsible monetary policy.
Uh the Federal Reserve Board indicated that the supply of money would be held between four to four and a half and seven and seven and a half.
They have done a good job in integrating the money supply with the uh - fiscal policy of the uh - executive and legislative branches of the government.
It would be catastrophic if the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board became the tool of the political uh - party that was in power.
It's important for our future uhh - economic security that that job be nonpolitical and uh - separate from the executive and the Legislative branches.
 You are familiar, of course, with the fact that I am the first president in thirty years who has reorganized the intelligence agencies in the federal government: the CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and the others.
We've done that by executive order.
Uhh - and I think uh - we've tightened it up; we've uh - straightened out their problems that developed over the last few years.
It doesn't seem to me that it's needed or necessary to have legislation in this particular regard.
Uhh - I have recommended to the Congress, however - I'm sure you're familiar with this - legislation that would uhh - make it uhh - very uhh - proper in - in the right way, that the attorney general could go in and get the right for wiretapping under security cases.
This was an effort that was made by the attorney general and myself, working with the Congress.
But even in this area, where I think new legislation would be justified, uh the Congress has not responded.
So, I feel in that case, as well as in the reorganization of the intelligence agencies, as I've done, we have to do it by executive order.
And I'm glad that we have a good director in George Bush.
We have good executive orders, and the CIA and the DIA and NASA uh - uh - NSA are now doing a good job under proper supervision.
 Well, one of the very serious things that's happened in our government in recent years, and has continued up until now, is a breakdown in the trust among our people in the [twenty-seven-minute delay]
 There has been too much government secrecy and not uh - not enough respect for the personal privacy of American citizens.
 Well, tonight we've had a chance to talk a lot about the past.
But I think it's time to talk about the future.
Our nation in the last eight years has been divided as never before.
It's a time for unity.
It's a time to draw ourselves together: to have a president and a Congress that can work together with mutual respect for a change, cooperating for a change, in the open for a change, so the people can understand their own government.
It's time for government, industry, labor, manufacturing, agriculture, education, other entities in our society to cooperate.
And it's a time for government to understand and to cooperate with our people.
For a long time our American citizens have been excluded, sometimes misled, sometimes have been lied to.
This is uh - not compatible with the purpose of our nation.
I believe in our country.
It needs to be competent.
The government needs to be well-managed, efficient, economical, We need to have a government that's sensitive to our people's needs - to those who are poor, who don't have adequate health care, who have been cheated too long with our tax programs, who've been out of jobs, whose families have been torn apart.
We need to restore the faith and the trust of the American people in their own government.
In addition to that, we've suffered because we haven't had leadership in this administration.
We've got a government of stalemate.
We've lost the vision of what our country can and ought to be.
This is not the America that we've known in the past.
It's not the America that we have to have in the future.
I don't claim to know all the answers.
But I've got confidence in my country.
Our economic strength is still there.
Our system of government - in spite of Vietnam, Cambodia, CIA, Watergate - is still the best system of government on earth.
And the greatest resource of all are the two hundred and fifteen million Americans who have within us the strength, the character, the intelligence, the experience, the patriotism, the idealism, the compassion, the sense of brotherhood on which we can rely in the future to restore the greatness to our country We ought not to be excluded from our government anymore.
We need a president who can go in - who derives his strength from the people.
I owe the special interests nothing.
I owe everything to you, the people of this country.
And I believe that we can bind our wounds.
I believe that we can work together.
And I believe that if we can tap the tremendous untapped reservoir of innate strength in this country, that we can once again have a government as good as our people, and let the world know what we still know and hope for - that we still live in the greatest and the strongest and the best country on earth.
 On November second all of you will make a very, very important decision.
One of the major issues in this campaign is trust.
A president should never promise more than he can deliver and a president should always deliver everything that he's promised.
A president can't be all things to all people.
A president should be the same thing to all people.
Another issue in this campaign, Governor Carter has endorsed the Democratic platform, which calls for more spending, bigger deficits, more inflation or mare taxes.
Governor Carter has embraced the record of the present Congress, dominated by his political party.
It calls for more of the same.
Governor Carter in his acceptance speech called for more and more programs, which means more and more government.
I think the real issue in this campaign, and that which you must decide on November second, is whether you should vote for his promise or my performance in two years in the White House.
On the fourth of July we had a wonderful two hundredth birthday - for our great country.
It was a superb occasion.
It was a glorious day.
In the first century of our nation's history our forefathers gave us the finest form of government in the history of mankind.
In the second century of our nation's history, our forefathers developed the most productive industrial nation in the history of the globe.
Our third century should be the century of individual freedom for all our two hundred and fifteen million Americans today and all that join us.
In the last few years government has gotten bigger and bigger; industry has gotten larger and larger; labor unions have gotten bigger and bigger; and our children have been the victims of mass education.
We must make this next century the century of the individual.
We should never forget that a government big enough to give us everything we want is a government big enough to take from us everything we have.
The individual worker in the plants throughout the United States should not be a small cog in a big machine.
The member of a labor union must have his rights strengthened and broadened and our children in their education should have an opportunity to improve themselves based on their talents and their abilities.
My mother and father, during the Depression, worked very hard to give me an opportunity to do better in our great country.
Your mothers and fathers did the same thing for you and others.
Betty and I have worked very hard to give our children a brighter future in the United States, our beloved country.
You and others in this great country have worked hard and done a great deal to give your children and your grandchildren the blessings of a better America.
I believe we can all work together to make the individuals in the future have more and all of us working together can build a better America.
 Miss Loomis, I think it's very appropriate that the first question in this first debate of Campaign '80 should relate to the economy of the country, because it seems to me that the people who are watching us tonight - 221 million Americans - are truly concerned about the poor rate of performance of the American economy over the last four years.
Governor Reagan is not responsible for what has happened over the last four years, nor am I.
The man who should be here tonight to respond to those charges chose not to attend.
But I want to answer as specifically as I can the question that you have just put to me.
Let me tell you that I, first of all, oppose an election year tax cut, whether it is the 10% across-the-board tax cut promised to the taxpayers by my opponent in this debate tonight, or whether it is the $27.5 billion tax cut promised on the 20th of August by President Carter.
I simply think that when we are confronting a budget deficit this year - and this fiscal year will end in about 10 days, and we are confronted with the possibility of a deficit of $60 billion, perhaps as much as $63 billion - that that simply would be irresponsible.
That, once again, the printing presses will start to roll; once again we will see the monetization of that debt result in a higher rate of inflation.
Even though we've seen some hopeful signs, perhaps, in the flash report on the third quarter, that perhaps the economy is coming out of the recession, we've also seen the rise in the rate of the prime; we have seen mortgage rates back up again, a sure sign of inflation in the housing industry.
What I would propose, and I proposed it way back in March when I was a candidate in my own state of Illinois, I proposed $11.3 billion, specifically, in cuts in the Federal budget.
I think we've got to have fiscal restraint.
And I said at that time that one of the things that we could do, that perhaps would save as much as $5 billion to $7 billion, according, to one of the leading members of the House Budget Committee, was to recalculate the index that is used to determine the cost of living benefits that are paid to civil service retirees, to military retirees.
That we ought to ... in addition to that, we ought to pay those retirement benefits on the basis of once a year, rather than twice a year, and save $750 billion.
In other words....
 fiscal restraint, I think is necessary.
 I believe that the only unpopular measures, actually, that could be, or would be applied, would be unpopular with the government, and with those.
perhaps, some special interest groups who are tied closely to government.
I believe that inflation today is caused by government simply spending more than government takes in, at the same time that government has imposed upon business and industry, from the shopkeeper on the corner to the biggest industrial plant in America, countless harassing regulations and punitive taxes that have reduced productivity at the same time they have increased the cost of production.
And when you are reducing productivity at the same time that you are turning out printing-press money in excessive amounts, you're causing inflation.
And it isn't really higher prices, it's just, you are reducing the value of the money.
You are robbing the American people of their savings.
And so, the plan that I have proposed - and contrary to what John says, my plan is for a phased-in tax cut over a three-year period, tax increase and depreciation allowances for business and industry to give them the capital to refurbish plant and equipment, research and development, improved technology - all of which we see our foreign competitors having, and we have the greatest percentage of outmoded industrial plant and equipment of any of the industrial nations - produce more, have stable money supply, and give the people of this country a greater share of their own savings.
 ...and $500 billion over the next five.
 Mr. Movers, in addition to saying that this is no time for a tax cut, in view of the incipient signs of renewed inflation, in addition to calling for restraint in Federal spending, 15 months ago, I also suggested we ought to have an emergency excise tax on gasoline.
I say that because I think, this year, we will send $90 billion out of this country to pay for imported oil, even though that.
those imports have been reduced.
And since I first made that proposal 15 months ago, the price of gasoline, which was then $.80, has gone up to about $1.30.
In other words, we've had a huge increase of about $.50 a gallon since that time, and all of that increase has gone out of this country - or much of it - into the pockets of OPEC oil producers.
Whereas I have proposed we ought to take.
put that tax on here at home, reduce our consumption of that imported oil.
Recycle those proceeds, then, back into the pockets of the American workers by reducing their tax payments.
their Social Security tax payments by 50%.
That, I think, in addition, would be an anti-inflationary measure that would strengthen the economy of this country.
 Well, I cannot see where a $.50 a gallon tax applied to gasoline would have changed the price of gasoline.
It would still have gone up as much as it has, and the $.50 would be added on top of that.
And it would be a tax paid by the consumers, and then we're asked to believe that some way, they would get this back to the consumers.
But why?
Why take it in the first place if you're going to give it back?
Why not leave it with them?
And John spoke about 15 years ago, on the position that he.
or 15 months ago, on what he believed in.
Fifteen months ago, he was a cosigner and advocating the very tax cut that I am proposing, and said that that would be a forward step in fighting inflation, and that it would be beneficial to the working people of this country.
 Well, I believe that conservation, at course, is worthy in and of itself.
Anything that would preserve, or help us use less energy, that would be fine, and I'm for it.
But I do not believe that conservation alone is the answer to the present energy problem, because all you're doing then is staving off, by a short time, the day when you would come to the end of the energy supply.
To say that we are limited, and at a dangerous point in this country with regard to energy, I think, is to ignore the fact.
The fact is, that in today's oil wells, there is more oil still there than we have so far taken out and used.
But it would require what is known as secondary or tertiary efforts to bring it out of the ground.
And this is known oil reserves, known supplies.
There are hundreds of millions of acres of land that have been taken out of circulation by the Government for whatever reason they have, that is believed by the most knowledgeable oil geologists to contain probably more oil and natural gas than we have used so far since we drilled that first well 121 years ago.
We have a coal supply that is equal to 50% of the world's coal supply, good for centuries, in this country.
I grant you that prices may go up, because as you go further and have to go deeper, you are adding to the cost of production.
We have nuclear power, which, I believe, with the safest.
the most stringent of safety requirements, could meet our energy needs for the next couple of decades while we go forward exploring the areas of solar power and other forms of energy that might be renewable and that would not be exhaustible.
All of these things can be done.
When you stop and think that we are only drilling on 2%.
have leased only 2% of the possible.
possibility for oil of the continental shelf around the United States; when you stop to think that the government has taken over 100 million acres of land out of circulation in Alaska, alone, that is believed by geologists to contain much in the line of minerals and energy sources, then I think it is the Government, and the Government with its own restrictions and regulations, that is creating the energy crisis.
That we are, indeed, an energy-rich nation.
 Well, Mr. Greenberg, I simply cannot allow to go unpassed the statements that have just been made by Mr. Reagan, who once again, has demonstrated, I think, a total misunderstanding of the energy crisis that confronts, not only this country, but the world, when he suggests that we have 27 years' supply of natural gas, 47 years' supply of oil, and all the rest, and that we really.
all we have to do is to get the Government off the back of the oil industry, and that's going to be enough.
 Well, as I've said, I am not an enemy of conservation.
I wouldn't be called a conservative if I were.
But, when my figures are challenged, as the President himself challenged them after I made them, I think it should be called to the attention of John and the others here that my figures are the figures of the Department of Energy, which has not been overly optimistic in recent years as to how much supply we have left.
That is the same Government that, in 1920, told us we only had enough oil left for 13 years, and 19 years later, told us we only had enough left for another 15 years.
As for saving energy and conserving, the American people haven't been doing badly at that.
Because in industry today, we're producing more, over the last several years, and at 12% less use of energy than we were back in about 1973.
And motorists are using 8% less than they were back at that time of the oil embargo.
So, I think we are proving that we can go forward with conservation and benefit from that.
But also, I think it is safe to say that we do have sources of energy that have not yet been used or found.
 Mr. Greenberg, I think my opponent in this debate tonight is overlooking one other very important fact.
And that is, that we cannot look at this as simply a national problem.
Even though it's true that, perhaps, between now and the end of the decade, our total consumption of oil may not increase by more than, perhaps, a million or 2 million barrels of oil a day.
The rest of the Western world, we are told, may see its consumption increase from 51 million barrels to about 66 million.
And that additional 15 million barrels is going to cause scarcity.
It is going to cause scarcity in world markets because there are at least five reputable studies, one even by the American Petroleum Institute itself, that, I think, clearly indicate that somewhere along around the end of the present decade, total world demand for oil is simply going to exceed total available supplies.
I think that conservation - I think that a change in lifestyles - is necessary, and we had better begin to plan for that now rather than later.
 Mr. Corddry, I am well aware of the present deficiencies in the Armed Forces of this country.
When you have a report, as we did recently, that six out of 10 CONUS Divisions in this country - Continental United States Army Divisions - simply could not pass a readiness test: that two out of three divisions that were to be allocated to the so-called Rapid Deployment Force could not meet a readiness test.
And in most cases, that failure to meet the test was because of a lack of manning requirements, an inability to fill many of the slots in those divisions.
Yes, I have seen figures that indicate that perhaps as of September, 1980 - this very month - that there is a shortage of about 104,000 in the ranks between E-4 and E-9.
And there were reports.
public reports not long ago about ships that could not leave American ports because of a lack of crews.
I talked to one of the leading former chiefs of Naval operations in my office a few weeks ago, who told me about 25,000 Chief Petty Officers being short.
But, I think that that is clearly related to the fact that, going back to the time when the all-volunteer Army was created in 1973 - and I worked hard for it and supported it - we simply have failed to keep pace with the cost of living.
And today, on the average, the average serviceman is at least 15% - and I happen to think that's a very modest estimate - 15% below what has happened to the cost of living over that period of time.
And as a result, the families of some of our young servicemen are on food stamps today.
And I think that's shocking; it's shameful.
So, yes, I told the American Legion National!
Convention, the VFW National Convention - when I spoke to each of those bodies - I outlined a very specific program of increasing pay and allowances, reenlistment bonuses.
That only makes sense.
But I would leave you with this thought, sir, to be quite specific in my answer to your question: that, of course, to protect the vital interests of this country, if that became impossible; if I could not, despite the very best efforts that I asked the Congress to put forward, to raise those pay and incentives and allowances, of course, I would not leave this country go undefended.
 Mr. Corddry, it's a shame now that there are only two of us here debating, because the two that are here are in more agreement than disagreement on this particular issue, and the only one who would be disagreeing with us is the President, if he were present.
I. too, believe in the voluntary military.
As a matter of fact, today the shortages of non-commissioned officers that John mentioned are such that if we tried to have a draft today, we wouldn't have the non-commissioned officers to train the draftees.
I believe the answer lies in just recognizing human nature and how we make everything else work in this country, when we want it to work.
Recognize that we have a voluntary military.
We are asking for men and women to join the military as a career, and we're asking them to deal with the most sophisticated of equipment.
And a young man is out there on a $1 billion carrier in charge of the maintenance of a $20 million aircraft, working 100 hours a week at times, and he's earning less for himself and his family, while he's away from his family, than he could earn if he were in one of the most menial jobs, working 40 hours a week here at home.
As an aid to enlistment.
we had an aid - 46% of the people who enlisted in the voluntary military up until 1977 said they did so for one particular reason, the G.I.
Bill of Rights - the fact that, by serving in the military, they could provide for a future college education.
In 1977, we took that away from the military.
That meant immediately 46% of your people that were signing up had no reason for signing up.
So I think it is a case of pay scale, of recognizing that if we're going to have young men and women responsible for our security, dealing with this sophisticated equipment, then for heaven's sakes, let's go out and have a pay scale that is commensurate with the sacrifice that we're asking of them.
Along with this, I think we need something else that has been allowed to deteriorate.
We need a million-man active reserve that could be called up on an instant's notice, and that would be also trained, ready to use that type of equipment.
Both of these, I think, would respond to the proper kind of incentives that we could offer these people.
The other day, I just - I'll hasten - I just saw one example.
Down in Texas.
I saw a high school that is military.
 Fine.
 I'll catch up with it later.
 Mr. Moyers.
I must say that I think I have better opportunity, however, of finding the necessary funds to pay what, admittedly, will be very, very substantial sums of money.
We signed one bill.
or we passed one bill, just a couple of weeks ago in the House of Representatives for $500 million - a half a billion dollars.
That is just a downpayment, in my opinion.
But, unlike Governor Reagan, I do not support a boondoggle like the MX missile.
I've just gotten a report from the Air Force that indicates that the 30-year lifecycle cost of that system is going to be $100 billion.
The initial cost is about $54 billion, and then when you add in the additional costs - not only the construction of the system, the missiles and the personnel, and so on - when you add in the additional costs over the lifecycle of that system, over $100 billion.
I would propose to save the taxpayers of this country from that kind of costly boondoggle.
 Well, let me just say that, with regard to that same missile system, I happen to support and believe in the missile, itself.
But that's not the $54 billion cost that John is talking about.
He's talking about that fantastic plan of the Administration to take thousands and thousands of square miles out in the Western states.
And first, he was going to dig a racetrack and have it going around in the racetrack so it would meet the requirements of SALT II treaty, and now he's decided it'll have a straight up and down thing, so it can he both verifiable and yet hideable from the Soviet Union.
We need the missile, I think, because we are so out of balance strategically that we lack a deterrent to a possible first assault.
But I am not in favor of the plan that is so costly.
And therefore, if I only had another second left, I'd say that that high school class in a military training - 40 of its 80 graduates last year entered the United States service academies; West Point, Annapolis and the Air Force Academy, and to see those young men made me very proud to realize that there are young people in this country that are prepared to go into that kind of a career in service of their country.
 I don't think I'd have to go against that pledge.
I think one of the problems today with the cities is Federal aid.
The mayors that I've talked to in some of our leading cities tell!
me that the Federal grants that come with.
for a specific cause or a specific objective, come with such red tape, such priorities established by a bureaucracy in Washington, that the local government's hands are tied with regard to using that money as they feel could best be used, and for what they think might be the top priority.
If they had that money without those government restrictions, every one of them has told me they could make great savings and make far greater use of the money.
What I have been advocating is, why don't we start with the Federal Government turning back tax sources to states and local governments, as well as the responsibilities for those programs?
Seventy-five percent of the people live in the cities.
I don't know of a city in America that doesn't have the kind of problems you're talking about.
But, where are we getting the money that the Federal Government is putting out to help them?
New York is being taxed for money that will then go to Detroit.
But Detroit is being taxed for money that, let's say, will go to Chicago, while Chicago is being taxed to help with the problems in Philadelphia.
Wouldn't it make a lot more sense if the government let them keep their own money there in the first place?
But there are other things that we can do with the inner cities, and I've believed.
I have talked of having zones in those cities that are run down, where there is a high percentage of people on welfare, and offer tax incentives.
The government isn't getting a tax now from businesses there because they aren't there, or from individuals who are on welfare rather than working.
And why don't we offer incentives for business and industry to start up in those zones?
Give them a tax moratorium for a period if they build and develop there.
The individuals that would then get jobs - give them a break that encourages them to leave the social welfare programs and go to work.
We could have an urban homestead act.
We've got thousands and thousands of homes owned by government boarded up, being vandalized, that have been taken in mortgage foreclosures.
What if we had a homestead act, and said to the people, for $1 we sell you this house.
All have to do is agree to refurbish it, make it habitable, and live in it - just as 100 or more years ago, we did with the open land in this country - urban .
or country homesteading.
 Mr. May, I recently saw a Princeton University study that indicated that the cities of America - the large cities of this country - are in worse shape today than they were in 1960.
It seems to totally belie the claim that I heard President Carter make a few days ago, that he was the first President that had come forth with a real urban strategy to meet the problems of urban America.
Incidentally, just this past week, the crown jewel in that program that he had devised was stolen, I guess, because a conference committee turned down the ambitious plan that he had to increase the amount of money that would be available to the Economic Development Administration for loan guarantees and direct loans and credits.
I'm happy to say that, in contrast to that, the Anderson-Lucey platform for America, program for the 80s, has devoted considerable time, and in very specific detail, we have talked about two things that ought to be done to aid urban America.
We call, first of all, for the creation of a $4 billion urban reinvestment trust fund to do exactly what you spoke about in your question - to rebuild the streets, to rebuild the cities, the leaking water mains.
I was in North Pittsburgh - I think it was a few weeks ago, on my campaign - the water mains in that city had begun to leak, and literally, there wasn't money available to fix them.
And until we can begin to recreate the basic infrastructure of the great cities of America, particularly in the upper Midwest and in the Northeast, they simply are not going to provide the kind of economic climate that will enable them to retain industry, enable them to retain the kind of solid industrial base that they need, so that they can provide jobs.
We have also provided in our program for a $4 billion Community Trust Fund, and we've told you where the money is coming from.
It's going to come from the dedication, by 1984, of the excise revenues that today are being collected by the Federal Government on alcohol and tobacco.
That money, I think, ought to be put into rebuilding the base of our cities.
In addition to that, jobs programs to re-employ the youth in our cities would be very high on my priority list, both the Youth Opportunities Act of 1980 and a billion-dollar program that I would recommend to put youth to work in energy projects, in conservation projects, in projects that would carry out some of the great national goals of our country.
 Yes.
Government claims.
John claims that he is making plain where the money will come from.
It will come from the pockets of the people.
It will come from the pockets of the people who are living in those very areas.
And the problem is, with Governments - Federal, State and Local - taking $.44 out of every dollar earned, that the Federal Government has pre-empted too many of the tax sources, and that the cities.
if Pittsburgh does not have the money to fix the leaking water mains, it's because the Federal Government has pre-empted.
Now, the Federal Government is going to turn around and say, well you have this problem; we will now hand you the money to do it.
But the Federal Government doesn't make money.
It just takes - from the people.
And in my view, this is not the answer to the problem.
Stand in the South Bronx as I did, in the spot where Jimmy Carter made his promise that he was going to, with multi-billion dollar programs, refurbish that area that looks like bombed-out London in World War II.
I stood there, and I met the people.
And I heard them ask just for something that would give them hope.
And I believe that, while all of the promises have been broken, they've never been carried out.
But I believe that my plan might offer an opportunity for that, if we would move into those areas and let, encourage - with the tax incentive - the private sector, to develop and to create the jobs for the people.
 Well, of course, where has the private sector been, Governor Reagan, during the years that our cities have been deteriorating?
It seems to me that to deny the responsibility of the Federal Government to do something about our crumbling cities is to deny the opportunity for one thing: To 55% of the black population of our country that is locked within the inner cities of the metropolitan areas of our country.
We simply cannot ignore the fact that, in those cities today, we have 55% youth unemployment among black and Hispanic youth.
And why is that?
It's because they have lost their industry.
And why have they lost their industry?
It's because they no longer present the kind of viable economic climate that makes it possible for industry to remain there, or to locate there.
I think Government has a responsibility to find jobs for the youth of this country, and that the place to start is to assist in the very important and necessary task of helping cities rebuild.
 Miss Quinn, I would be very happy to accept the challenge of your question tonight, to tell the voters of this country exactly what I think it's going to cost, because I believe that all too often in past elections, politicians have simply been promising people things that they cannot deliver.
When these Presidential Debates were held just four years ago, I remember the incumbent President, who was willing to debate, President Ford, telling the American people that they simply ought not to vote for somebody who promised more than they could deliver.
Well, we've seen what has happened.
We haven't gotten either the economies in Government that were promised; we haven't gotten the 4% inflation that we were supposed to get at the end of Mr. Carter's first term.
Instead we had, I think, in the second quarter, a Consumer Price Index registering around 12%.
And nobody really knows, with the latest increase in the Wholesale Price Index - that's about 18% on an annualized basis - what it's going to be.
Let me say this.
I think my programs are far less inflationary than those of Governor Reagan.
His own running mate, when he was running for the Presidency, said that they would cost 30% inflation inside of two years, and he cited his leading economic advisor, a very distinguished economist, Paul Macavoy, as the source of that information.
He went so far as to call it "brutal economics."
I've been very careful - I have been very careful in saying that what I'm going to do is to bring Federal spending under control first.
I would like to stand here and promise the American people a tax cut, as Governor Reagan has done.
But, you know, it's gotten to be about $122 difference.
Somebody worked it out.
And they figured out that between the tax cut that Governor Reagan is promising the American people, and the tax cut that Jimmy Carter is promising in 198I, his is worth about $122 more.
So you, dear voters, are out there on the auction block, and these two candidates are bidding for your votes.
And one is going to give you $122 more if you happen to be in that range of about a $20,000-a-year income.
I'm going to wait until I see that that inflation rate is going down, before I even begin to phase in the business tax cuts that I've talked about.
But I think, by improving productivity, they would be far less inflationary than the consumption-oriented tax cut that Governor Reagan is recommending.
 Miss Quinn, I don't have to.
I've done it.
We have a back-up paper to my economic speech of a couple of weeks ago in Chicago, that gives all of the figures.
And we used - yes, we used - the Senate Budget Committee's projections for five years, which are based on an average inflation rate of 7.5% - which, I think, that under our plan, can be eliminated.
And eliminated probably more quickly than our plan, but we wanted to be so conservative with it, that people would see how.
how well it could be done.
Now, John's been in the Congress for 20 years.
And John tells us that first, we've got to reduce spending before we can reduce taxes.
Well, if you've got a kid that's extravagant, you can lecture him all you want to about his extravagance.
Or you can cut his allowance and achieve the same end much quicker.
But Government has never reduced Government does not tax to get the money it needs.
Government always needs the money it gets.
And when John talks about his non-inflationary plan, as far as I have been able to learn, there are 88 proposals in it that call for additional Government spending programs.
Now, I speak with some confidence of our plan, because I took over a state - California - 10% of the population of this nation - a state that, if it were a nation, would be the seventh-ranking economic power in the world.
And that state we controlled spending.
We cut the rate of increase in spending in half.
But at the same time, we gave back to the people of California - in tax rebates, tax credits, tax cuts - $5.7 billion.
I vetoed 993 measures without having a veto overturned.
And among those vetoes, I stopped $16 billion in additional spending.
And the funny thing was that California, which is normally above the national average in inflation and unemployment, for those six years for the first time, was below the national average in both inflation and unemployment.
We have considered inflation in our figures.
We deliberately took figures that we, ourselves, believed were too conservative.
I believe the budget can be balanced by 1982 or 1983, and it is a combination of planned reduction of the tax increase that Carter has built into the economy, and that's what he's counting on for his plan.
But he's going to get a half-a-trillion dollars more over the next five years that he can use for additional programs, or hopefully, someplace down the line, balancing the budget.
We believe that that's too much additional money to take out of the pockets of the people.
 Mr. Moyers, I'm not here to debate Governor Reagan's record as Governor.
This is 1980 and not 1966.
But I do know that, despite his pledge to reduce state Government spending, that it rose from $4.6 billion when he took office in 1967, to $10.2 billion during his eight years in office.
Spending, in other words.
more than doubled, and it rose at a faster rate than spending was rising in the Federal Government.
But on his very optimistic figures about his tax cut producing a balanced budget by 1983, and the fact that he is using, he says, the figures of the Senate Budget Committee, that Senate Budget Committee Report does not accommodate all of the Reagan defense plans.
It doesn't accommodate the expenditures that he calls for, for accelerated development and deployment of a new manned strategic bomber, for a permanent fleet in the Indian Ocean, for the restoration of the fleet to 600 ships, to the development and deployment of a dedicated modern aircraft interceptor.
In other words, I have seen his program costed out to the point where it would amount to more than $300 million a year, just for the military.
And I think the figures that he has given are simply not going to stand up.
 Well, some people look up figures, and some people make up figures.
And John has just made up some very interesting figures.
We took the Senate report, of course.
But we did factor in our own ideas with regard to increases in the projected military spending that we believe would, over a period of time, do what is necessary.
Now also, with regard to the figures about California.
The truth of the matter is, we did cut the increase in spending in half.
It at the John doesn't quite realize - he's never held an executive position of that kind.
And I think being Governor of California is probably the closest thing to the Presidency, if that's possible, of any executive job in America today - because it is the most populous state.
And I can only tell him that we reduced, in proportion of other states, the per capita spending, the per capita size of Government - we only increased the size of Government one-twelfth what it had increased in the preceding eight years.
And one journal, the San Francisco Chronicle, a respected newspaper, said there was no question about the fact that Governor Reagan had prevented the State of California from going bankrupt.
 Oh, I'm it's my question.
But whether I agree or disagree with some individual, or what he may say, or how he may say it, I don't think there's any way that we can suggest that because people believe in God and go to church, that they should not want reflected in those people and those causes they support, their own belief in morality, and in the high traditions and principles which we've abandoned so much in this country.
Going around this country, I think that I have found a great hunger in America for a spiritual revival.
For a belief that law must be based on a higher law.
For a return to traditions and values that we once had.
Our Government, in its most sacred documents - the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence and all - speak of man being created, of a Creator.
That we're a nation under God.
Now, I have thought for a long time that too many of our churches have been too reluctant to speak up in behalf of what they believe is proper in Government, and they have been too too lax in interfering, in recent years, with Government's invasion of the family itself, putting itself between parent and child.
I vetoed a number of bills of that kind myself, when I was in California.
Now, whether it is rightful, on a single issue, for anyone to advocate that someone should not be elected or not, I won't take a position on that.
But I do believe that no one in this country should be denied the right to express themselves, or to even try to persuade others to follow their leader.
That's what elections are all about.
 Ms. Golden, certainly the church has the right to take a position on moral issues.
But to try, as occurred in the case that you mentioned - that specific case - to try to tell the parishioners of any church, of any denomination, how they should vote, or for whom they should vote, I think violates the principle of separation of church and state.
Now, Governor Reagan is running on a platform that calls for a Constitutional amendment banning abortion.
I think that is a moral issue that ought to be left to the freedom of conscience of the individual.
And for the state to interfere with a Constitutional amendment, and tell a woman that she must carry that pregnancy to term, regardless of her personal belief, that, I think, violates freedom of conscience as much as anything that I can think of.
And he is also running on a platform that suggests a litmus test for the selection of judges - that only judges that hold a certain, quote, "view," on the sanctity of family life, ought to be appointed to the Federal Judiciary, one of the three great independent branches of our Government.
No.
I believe in freedom of choice.
I don't believe in Constitutional Amendments that would interfere with that.
I don't believe in trying to legislate new tests for the selection of the Federal Judiciary.
On the Amendment that you mentioned, I abandoned it 15 years ago.
And I have said freely, all over this country, that it was a mistake for me or anyone to ever try to put the Judeo-Christian heritage of this country, important as it is, and important as my religious faith is to me - it's a very deeply personal matter.
But for me to try, in this very pluralistic society of ours, to try to frame any definition, whatever, of what that belief should be, is wrong.
And so, not once, but twice - in 1971 - I voted on the floor of the House of Representatives against a Constitutional amendment that tried to bring prayer back into the public schools.
I think mother ought to whisper to Johnny and to Susie, as they button their coats in the morning and leave for the classroom, "Be sure to say a prayer before you start your day's work."
But I don't think that the state, the Board of Regents, a Board of Education, or any state official, should try to compose that prayer for a child to recite.
 The litmus test that John says is in the Republican platform, says no more than the judges to be appointed should have a respect for innocent life.
Now, I don't think that's a bad idea.
I think all of us should have a respect for innocent life.
With regard to the freedom of the individual for choice with regard to abortion, there's one individual who's not being considered at all.
That's the one who is being aborted.
And I've noticed that everybody that is for abortion has already been born.
I I think that, technically, I know this is a difficult and an emotional problem, and many people sincerely feel on both sides of this, but I do believe that maybe we could find the answer through medical evidence, if we would determine once and for all, is an unborn child a human being?
I happen to believe it is.
 I also think that that unborn child has a right to be wanted.
And I also believe, sir, that the most personal intimate decision that any woman is ever called upon to make is the decision as to whether or not she shall carry a pregnancy to term.
And for the state to interfere in that decision, under whatever guise, and with whatever rationale, for the state to try to take over in that situation, and by edict, command what the individual shall do, and substitute itself for that individual's conscience, for her right to consult her rabbi, her minister, her priest, her doctor - any other counselor of her choice - I think goes beyond what we want to ever see accomplished in this country, if we really believe in the First Amendment: if we really believe in freedom of choice and the right of the individual.
 Before beginning my closing remarks, here, I would just like to remark a concern that I have that we have criticized the failures of the Carter policy here rather considerably, both of us this evening.
And there might be some feeling of unfairness about this because he was not here to respond.
But I believe it would have been much more unfair to have had John Anderson denied the right to participate in this debate.
And I want to express my appreciation to the League of Women Voters for adopting a course with which I believe the great majority of Americans are in agreement.
Now, as to my closing remarks: I've always believed that this land was placed here between the two great oceans by some divine plan.
That it was placed here to be found by a special kind of people - people who had a special love for freedom and who had the courage to uproot themselves and leave hearth and homeland, and came to what, in the beginning, was the most undeveloped wilderness possible.
We came from 100 different corners of the earth.
We spoke a multitude of tongues.
We landed on this Eastern shore and then went out over the mountains and the prairies and the deserts and the far western mountains to the Pacific, building cities and towns and farms, and schools and churches.
If wind, water or fire destroyed them, we built them again.
And in so doing, at the same time, we built a new breed of human called an American - a proud, an independent., and a most compassionate individual, for the most part.
Two hundred years ago, Tom Paine, when the 13 tiny colonies were trying to become a nation, said, we have it in our power to begin the world over again.
Today.
we're confronted with the horrendous problems that we've discussed here tonight.
And some people in high positions of leadership, tell us that the answer is to retreat.
That the best is over.
That we must cut back.
That we must share in an ever-increasing scarcity.
That we must, in the failure to be able to protect our national security as it is today, we must not be provocative to any possible adversary.
Well, we, the living Americans, have gone through four wars.
We've gone through a Great Depression in our lifetime that literally was worldwide and almost brought us to our knees.
But we came through all of those things and we achieved even new heights and new greatness.
The living Americans today have fought harder, paid a higher price for freedom, and done more to advance the dignity of man than any people who ever lived on this earth.
For 200 years, we've lived in the future, believing that tomorrow would be better than today, and today would be better than yesterday.
I still believe that.
I'm not running for the Presidency because I believe that I can solve the problems we've discussed tonight.
I believe the people of this country can, and together, we can begin the world over again.
We can meet our destiny - and that destiny to build a land here that will be, for all mankind, a shining city on a hill.
I think we ought to get at it.
 Mr. Movers, President Carter was not right a few weeks ago when he said that the American people were confronted with only two choices, with only two men, and with only two parties.
I think you've seen tonight in this debate that Governor Reagan and I have agreed on exactly one thing - we are both against the reimposition of a peacetime draft.
We have disagreed, I believe, on virtually every other issue.
I respect him for showing tonight - for appearing here, and I thank the League of Women Voters for the opportunity that they have given me.
I am running for President as an Independent because I believe our country is in trouble.
I believe that all of us are going to have to begin to work together to solve our problems.
If you think that I am a spoiler, consider these facts: Do you really think that our economy is healthy?
Do you really think that 8 million Americans being out of work and the 50% unemployment among the youth of our country are acceptable?
Do you really think that our armed forces are really acceptably strong in those areas of conventional capability where they should be?
Do you think that our political institutions are working the way they should when literally only half of our citizens vote?
I don't think you do think that.
And therefore, I think you ought to consider doing something about it, and voting for an Independent in 1980.
You know, a generation of office seekers has tried to tell the American people that they could get something for nothing.
It's been a time, therefore, of illusion and false hopes, and the longer it continues, the more dangerous it becomes.
We've got to stop drifting.
What I wish tonight so desperately is that we had had more time to talk about some of the other issues that are so fundamentally important.
A great historian, Henry Steele Commager, said that in their lust for victory, neither traditional party is looking beyond November.
And he went on to cite three issues that their platforms totally ignore: atomic warfare, Presidential Directive 59 notwithstanding.
If we don't resolve that issue, all others become irrelevant.
The issue of our natural resources; the right of posterity to inherit the earth, and what kind of earth will it be?
The issue of nationalism - the recognition, he says, that every major problem confronting us is global, and cannot be solved by nationalism here or elsewhere - that is chauvinistic, that is parochial, that is as anachronistic as states' rights was in the days of Jefferson Davis.
Those are some of the great issues - atomic warfare, the use of our natural resources, and the issue of nationalism - that I intend to be talking about in the remaining six weeks of this campaign, and I dare hope that the American people will be listening and that they will see that an Independent government of John Anderson and Patrick Lucey can give us the kind of coalition government that we need in 1980 to begin to solve our problems.
Thank you.
 One of the key tests of leadership is whether one sees clearly the nature of the problems confronted by our nation.
And perhaps the dominant domestic issue of our times is what do we do about these enormous deficits.
 Absolutely, and I proposed over a hundred billion dollars in cuts in Federal spending over 4 years, but I am not going to cut it out of Social Security and Medicare and student assistance and things -- [applause] -- that people need.
These people depend upon all of us for the little security that they have, and I'm not going to do it that way.
 Yes.
I don't believe that Mr. Mondale has a plan for balancing the budget; he has a plan for raising taxes.
And, as a matter of fact, the biggest single tax increase in our nation's history took place 1977.
And for the 5 years previous to our taking office, taxes doubled in the United States, and the budgets increased $318 billion.
So, there is no ratio between taxing and balancing a budget.
Whether you borrow the money or whether you simply tax it away from the people, you're taking the same amount of money out of the private sector, unless and until you bring down government's share of what it is taking.
 Well, that's exactly the commitment that was made to the American people in 1980: He would never reduce benefits.
And of course, what happened right after the election is they proposed to cut Social Security benefits by 25 percent -- reducing the adjustment for inflation, cutting out minimum benefits for the poorest on Social Security, removing educational benefits for dependents whose widows were trying -- with widows trying to get them through college.
Everybody remembers that; people know what happened.
 Well, first of all, I think the first answer this evening suggests exactly what I'm saying.
There is no question that we face this massive deficit, and almost everybody agrees unless we get it down, the chances for long-term, healthy growth are nil.
And it's also unfair to dump these tremendous bills on our children.
 Well, I think we're getting better all the time.
And I think tonight, as we contrast for the first time our differing approach to government, to values, to the leadership in this country, I think as this debate goes forward, the American people will have for the first time a chance to weigh the two of us against each other.
And I think, as a part of that process, what I am trying to say will come across, and that is that we must lead, we must command, we must direct, and a President must see it like it is.
He must stand for the values of decency that the American people stand for, and he must use the power of the White House to try to control these nuclear weapons and lead this world toward a safer world.
 Well, whether he does or not, let me suggest my own idea about the leadership factor, since you've asked it.
And, incidentally, I might say that with regard to the 25-percent cut in Social Security -- before I get to the answer to your question -- the only 25-percent cut that I know of was accompanying that huge 1977 tax increase, was a cut of 25 percent in the benefits for every American who was born after 1916.
 Our policy was not to cut subsidies.
We have believed in partnership, and that was an example of a partnership between, not only local government and the Federal Government but also between the private sector that built that particular structure.
And this is what we've been trying to do, is involve the Federal Government in such partnerships.
 Well, I guess I'm reminded a little bit of what Will Rogers once said about Hoover.
He said, "It's not what he doesn't know that bothers me; it's what he knows for sure that just ain't so.''
[Laughter] The fact of it is: The President's budget sought to cut Social Security by 25 percent.
It's not an opinion; it's a fact.
And when the President was asked the other day, "What do you want to cut in the budget?
'', he said, "Cut those things I asked for but didn't get.''
That's Social Security and Medicare.
 Well, let me just respond with regard to Social Security.
When we took office, we discovered that the program that the Carter-Mondale administration had said would solve the fiscal problems of Social Security for the next 50 years wouldn't solve them for 5.
Social Security was due to go bankrupt before 1983.
 Well, I was raised to have a faith and a belief and have been a member of a church since I was a small boy.
In our particular church, we did not use that term, "born again,'' so I don't know whether I would fit that -- that particular term.
But I have -- thanks to my mother, God rest her soul -- the firmest possible belief and faith in God.
And I don't believe -- I believe, I should say, as Lincoln once said, that I could not -- I would be the most stupid man in the world if I thought I could confront the duties of the office I hold if I could not turn to someone who was stronger and greater than all others.
And I do resort to prayer.
 The answer to your question is very simple about why I don't go to church.
I have gone to church regularly all my life, and I started to here in Washington.
And now, in the position I hold and in the world in which we live, where Embassies do get blown up in Beirut -- we're supposed to talk about that on the debate the 21st, I understand -- but I pose a threat to several hundred people if I go to church.
 First of all, I accept President Reagan's affirmation of faith.
I'm sure that we all accept and admire his commitment to his faith, and we are strengthened, all of us, by that fact.
 No.
What I object to -- [applause] -- what I object to -- what I object to is someone seeking to use his faith to question the faith of another or to use that faith and seek to use the power of government to impose it on others.
 Yes, it's very difficult to rebut, because I find myself in so much agreement with Mr. Mondale.
I, too, want that wall that is in the Constitution of separation of church and state to remain there.
The only attacks I have made are on people who apparently would break away at that wall from the government side, using the government, using the power of the courts and so forth to hinder that part of the Constitution that says the government shall not only not establish a religion, it shall not inhibit the practice of religion.
And they have been using these things to have government, through court orders, inhibit the practice of religion.
A child wants to say grace in a school cafeteria and a court rules that they can't do it because it's school property.
These are they types of things that I think have been happening in a kind of a secular way that have been eroding that separation, and I am opposed to that.
 The platform to which the President refers, in fact, calls for a religious test in the selection of judges.
And Jerry Falwell says that means we get two or three judges.
And it would involve a religious test for the first time in American life.
 My answer is that this campaign isn't over yet.
And when people vote, I think you're going to see a very strong verdict by the American people that they favor the approach that I'm talking about.
 Well, tonight we had the first debate over the deficit.
The President says it'll disappear automatically.
I've said it's going to take some work.
I think the American people will draw their own conclusions.
 Well, again, I'm running on the record.
I think sometimes Mr. Mondale's running away from his.
But I'm running on the record of what we have asked for.
We'll continue to try to get things that we didn't get in a program that has already brought the rate of spending of government down from 17 percent to 6.1 percent, a program of returning authority and autonomy to the local and State governments that has been unjustly seized by the Federal Government.
And you might find those words in a Democratic platform of some years ago -- I know, because I was a Democrat at that time.
And I left the party eventually, because I could no longer follow the turn in the Democratic leadership that took us down an entirely different path, a path of centralizing authority in the Federal Government, lacking trust in the American people.
 There are tasks that government legitimately should enforce and tasks that government performs well, and you've named some of them.
Crime has come down the last 2 years, for the first time in many, many decades that it has come down -- or since we've kept records -- 2 consecutive years, and last year it came down the biggest drop in crime that we've had.
I think that we've had something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide.
 The President says that when the Democratic Party made its turn, he left it.
The year that he decided we had lost our way was the year that John F. Kennedy was running against Richard Nixon.
I was chairman of "Minnesotans for Kennedy;'' President Reagan was chairman of a thing called "Democrats for Nixon.''
Now, maybe we made a wrong turn with Kennedy, but I'll be proud of supporting him all of my life.
And I'm very happy that John Kennedy was elected, because John Kennedy looked at the future with courage, saw what needed to be done, and understood his own government.
 Before I campaigned as a Democrat for a Republican candidate for President, I had already voted for Dwight Eisenhower to be President of the United States.
And so, my change had come earlier than that.
I hadn't gotten around to reregistering as yet.
I found that was rather difficult to do.
But I finally did it.
 I have believed that in the appointment of judges that all that was specified in the party platform was that they respect the sanctity of human life.
Now, that I would want to see in any judge and with regard to any issue having to do with human life.
But with regard to abortion, and I have a feeling that this is -- there's been some reference without naming it here in the remarks of Mr. Mondale tied to injecting religion into government.
With me, abortion is not a problem of religion, it's a problem of the Constitution.
 The laws regarding that always were State laws.
It was only when the Supreme Court handed down a decision that the Federal Government intervened in what had always been a State policy.
Our laws against murder are State laws.
So, I would think that this would be the point of enforcement on this.
 This is one of the most emotional and difficult issues that could possibly be debated.
I think your questions, however, underscore the fact there is probably no way that government should or could answer this question in every individual case and in the private lives of the American people.
 The basic decision of the Supreme Court is that each person has to make this judgment in her own life, and that's the way it's been done.
And it's a personal and private, moral judgment.
I don't know the answer to when life begins.
And it's not that simple, either.
You've got another life involved.
And if it's rape, how do you draw moral judgments on that?
If it's incest, how do you draw moral judgments on that?
Does every woman in America have to present herself before some judge picked by Jerry Falwell to clear her personal judgment?
It won't work.
[Applause]
 Yes.
Well, with regard to this being a personal choice, isn't that what a murderer is insisting on, his or her right to kill someone because of whatever fault they think justifies that?
 I agree with that, and that's why I was a principal sponsor of a liberal adoption law, so that more of these children could come to term, so that the young mothers were educated, so we found an option, an alternative.
I'm all for that.
But the question is whether this other option proposed by the President should be pursued.
And I don't agree with it.
 In my opinion, as we deal with this deficit, people from about $70,000 a year on down have to be dealt with very, very carefully, because they are the ones who didn't get any relief the first time around.
 The first thing is, everybody 25,000 and under would have no tax increase.
 You know, I wasn't going to say this at all, but I can't help it.
There you go again.
[Laughter] I don't have a plan to tax -- or increase taxes.
I'm not going to increase taxes.
I can understand why you are, Mr. Mondale, because as a Senator you voted 16 times to increase taxes.
 Yes, I had used -- "last resort'' would always be with me.
If you got the Government down to the lowest level, that you yourself could say it could not go any lower and still perform the services for the people, and if the recovery was so complete that you knew you were getting the ultimate amount of revenues that you could get through that growth, and there was still some slight difference there between those two lines, then I had said once that, yes, you would have to then look to see if taxes should not be adjusted.
 Well, first of all, I gave him the benefit of the doubt on the house deal.
I'm just talking about the 12.8 percent that he paid, and that's what's happening all over this country with wealthy Americans.
They've got so many loopholes they don't have to pay much in taxes.
 Yes.
 You remember the last time you said that?
 Mm-hmm.
 You said it when President Carter said that you were going to cut Medicare, and you said, "Oh, no, there you go again, Mr.
President.''
And what did you do right after the election?
You went out and tried to cut $20 billion out of Medicare.
And so, when you say, "There you go again'' -- people remember this, you know.
[Laughter] And people will remember that you signed the biggest tax increase in the history of California and the biggest tax increase in the history of the United States, and what are you going to do?
You've got a $260 billion deficit.
You can't wish it away.
You won't slow defense spending; you refuse to do that -- --
 Sorry.
 Yes.
With regard to Medicare, no, but it's time for us to say that Medicare is in pretty much the same condition that Social Security was, and something is going to have to be done in the next several years to make it fiscally sound.
And, no, I never proposed any $20 billion should come out of Medicare; I have proposed that the program we must treat with that particular problem.
And maybe part of that problem is because during the 4 years of the Carter-Mondale administration medical costs in this country went up 87 percent.
 I gave you back some of that time.
[Laughter]
 Well, some of those facts and figures just don't stand up.
Yes, there has been an increase in poverty, but it is a lower rate of increase than it was in the preceding years before we got here.
It has begun to decline, but it is still going up.
 Yes.
 That had nothing to do with the other thing of talking about their needs or anything.
I remember distinctly, I was segueing into another subject.
I was talking about the things that have been accomplished, and that was referring to the revival of patriotism and optimism, the new spirit that we're finding all over America.
And it is a wonderful thing to see when you get out there among the people.
So, that was the only place that that was used.
 Number one, we've got to get the debt down to get the interest rates down so the economy will grow and people will be employed.
 I think the American people want to make certain that that dollar is wisely spent.
I think they stand for civil rights.
I know they're all for education in science and training, which I strongly support.
They want these young people to have a chance to get jobs and the rest.
I think the business community wants to get involved.
I think they're asking for new and creative ways to try to reach it with everyone involved.
I think that's part of it.
I think also that the American people want a balanced program that gives us long-term growth so that they're not having to take money that's desperate to themselves and their families and give it to someone else.
I'm opposed to that, too.
 Yes.
The connection that's been made again between the deficit and the interest rates -- there is no connection between them.
There is a connection between interest rates and inflation, but I would call to your attention that in 1981 while we were operating still on the Carter-Mondale budget that we inherited -- that the interest rates came down from 21\1/2\, down toward the 12 or 13 figure.
And while they were coming down, the deficits had started their great increase.
They were going up.
Now, if there was a connection I think that there would be a different parallel between deficits getting larger and interest rates going down.
 Mr. President, if I heard you correctly, you said that these deficits don't have anything to do with interest rates.
I will grant you that interest rates were too high in 1980, and we can have another debate as to why -- energy prices and so on.
There's no way of glossing around that.
But when these huge deficits went in place in 1981, what's called the real interest rates -- the spread between inflation and what a loan costs you doubled -- and that's still the case today.
And the result is interest costs that have never been seen before in terms of real charges, and it's attributable to the deficit.
 Do you want to give me some suggestions?
[Laughter] I'm going to use my time a little differently.
I'm going to give the President some credit.
I think the President has done some things to raise the sense of spirit, morale, good feeling in this country, and he's entitled to credit for that.
What I think we need, however, is not just that but to move forward, not just congratulating ourselves but challenging ourselves to get on with the business of dealing with America's problems.
 Without any doubt, I have stood up and told the American people that that $263 billion deficit must come down.
And I've done what no candidate for President has ever done, I told you before the election what I'd do.
 Well, now, I have to start with a smile, since his kind words to me.
 Oh, I -- --
 Okay.
All right.
 Why the deficits are so much of a problem for him now, but that in 1976, when the deficit was $52 billion and everyone was panicking about that, he said, no, that he thought it ought to be bigger, because a bigger deficit would stimulate the economy and would help do away with unemployment.
In 1979 he made similar statements, the same effect, that the deficits -- there was nothing wrong with having deficits.
 Well, we've just finished almost the whole debate.
And the American people don't have the slightest clue about what President Reagan will do about these deficits.
[Laughter] And yet, that's the most important single issue of our time.
 No, I might as well just go with -- --
 I don't think so.
I'm all confused now.
 All right.
 Well, we'll include it in that.
 Four years ago, in similar circumstances to this, I asked you, the American people, a question.
I asked: "Are you better off than you were 4 years before?''
The answer to that obviously was no, and as the result, I was elected to this office and promised a new beginning.
 I want to thank the League of Women Voters and the city of Louisville for hosting this evening's debate.
I want to thank President Reagan for agreeing to debate.
He didn't have to, and he did, and we all appreciate it.
 I think we've seen a deterioration of values.
I think for a while as a nation we condoned those things we should have condemned.
For a while, as I recall, it even seems to me that there was talk of legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana and other drugs, and I think that's all wrong.
So we've seen a deterioration in values, and one of the things that I think we should do about it in terms of cause is to instill values into the young people in our schools.
We got away, we got into this feeling that value- free education was the thing.
And I don't believe that at all I do believe there are fundamental rights and wrongs as far as use.
And, of course, as far as the how we make it better, yes, we can do better on interdiction.
But we've got to do a lot better on education, and we have to do, be tougher on those who commit crimes.
We've got to get after the users more.
We have to change this whole culture.
You know, I saw a movie - "Crocodile Dundee."
And I saw the cocaine scene treated with humor, as though this was a humorous little incident.
And it's bad.
Everybody ought to be in this thing.
Entertainment industry, people involved in the schools, education.
And it isn't a Republican or a Democrat or a liberal problem.
But we have got to instill values in these young people.
And I have put forward a many-point drug program that includes what I would do as president of the United States; in terms of doing better on interdiction; and in terms of better in the neighborhoods.
But I think we're all in this together, and my plea to the American people is values in the schools.
 I agree with Mr. Bush that values are important.
But it's important that our leaders demonstrate those values from the top.
That means those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership have to reflect those values ourselves.
Here we are with a government that's been dealing with a drug-running Panamanian dictator.
We've been dealing with him; he's been dealing drugs to our kids.
Governors like me and others have been trying to deal with the consequences.
I remember being in a high school in my own state as we were organizing something we call the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs, and a young 16 year old girl coming up to me, desperate, addicted, dependent, saying, Governor, I need help.
We're providing that young woman with help.
But I want to be a president of the United States who makes sure that we never again do business with a drug-running Panamanian dictator, that we never again funnel aid to the contras through convicted drug dealers.
Values begin at the top, in the White House.
Those are the values I want to bring to the presidency and to the White House beginning in January of 1989.
 I'm saying that those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership, Jim, have a special responsibility, not only to come up with programs, and I have outlined in detail the very important, very strong program of enforcement as well as drug education prevention.
And Mr. Bush is right - the two go hand in hand.
But if our government itself is doing business with people who we know are engaged in drug profiteering and drug trafficking, if we don't understand that that sends out a very, very bad message to our young people, it's a little difficult for me to understand just how we can reach out to that youngster that I talked about and to young people like her all over the country, and say to them we want to help you.
Now, I've outlined in great detail a program for being tough on enforcement at home and abroad, doubling the number of drug enforcement agents, having a hemispheric summit soon after the 20th of January when we bring our democratic neighbors and allies together here in this hemisphere and go to work together.
But we also have to take demand seriously.
You know, we have five percent of the world's population in this country.
We're consuming 50 percent of the world's cocaine.
Doing better in the neighborhoods.
But I think we're all in this together, and my plea to the American people is values in the schools.
 I agree with Mr. Bush that values are important.
But it's important that our leaders demonstrate those values from the top.
That means those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership have to reflect those values ourselves.
Here we are with a government that's been dealing with a drug-running Panamanian dictator.
We've been dealing with him; he's been dealing drugs to our kids.
Governors like me and others have been trying to deal with the consequences.
I remember being in a high school in my own state as we were organizing something we call the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs, and a young 16 year old girl coming up to me, desperate, addicted, dependent, saying, Governor, I need help.
We're providing that young woman with help.
But I want to be a president of the United States who makes sure that we never again do business with a drug-running Panamanian dictator, that we never again funnel aid to the contras through convicted drug dealers.
Values begin at the top, in the White House.
Those are the values I want to bring to the presidency and to the White House beginning in January of 1989.
 I'm saying that those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership, Jim, have a special responsibility, not only to come up with programs, and I have outlined in detail the very important, very strong program of enforcement as well as drug education prevention.
And Mr. Bush is right - the two go hand in hand.
But if our government itself is doing business with people who we know are engaged in drug profiteering and drug trafficking, if we don't understand that that sends out a very, very bad message to our young people, it's a little difficult for me to understand just how we can reach out to that youngster that I talked about and to young people like her all over the country, and say to them we want to help you.
Now, I've outlined in great detail a program for being tough on enforcement at home and abroad, doubling the number of drug enforcement agents, having a hemispheric summit soon after the 20th of January when we bring our democratic neighbors and allies together here in this hemisphere and go to work together.
But we also have to take demand seriously.
You know, we have five percent of the world's population in this country.
We're consuming 50 percent of the world's cocaine.
And in my state I'm proud to say we've organized a drug education and prevention program which the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration says is a model for the country.
We're helping youngsters; we're reaching out to them.
And we're beginning with drug education and prevention beginning in the early elementary grades in every elementary school in our state, and that's the kind of effort we need in every elementary school in the United States of America.
And we've got to begin early, in the first, second and third grade, before our youngsters begin to experiment with these very, very dangerous substances.
I guess the question I would ask of Mr. Bush is how we instill those values, how we create this environment for the drug free schools that we want in this country.
If he or representatives of the administration are either with or involving people like Noriega in our foreign policy, or don't pursue that connection in a way that makes it possible for us to cut it off and to be an example to our kids all over the country.
 Well, the other day my opponent was given a briefing by the CIA.
I asked for and received the same briefing.
I am very careful in public life about dealing with classified information.
And what I'm about to say is unclassified.
Seven administrations were dealing with Mr. Noriega.
It was the Reagan-Bush administration that brought this man to justice.
And as the governor of Massachusetts knows, there was no evidence that governor - that Mr. Noriega was involved in drugs, no hard evidence until we indicted him.
And so I think it's about time we get this Noriega matter in perspective.
Panama is a friendly country.
I went down there and talked to the president of Panama about cleaning up their money laundering, and Mr. Noriega was there, but there was no evidence at that time, and when the evidence was there, we indicted him.
And we want to bring him to justice.
And so call off all those pickets out there that are trying to tear down seven different administrations.
 Yes, I've been very specific about those, John.
And let me lay out for you my own strategy for bring that deficit down, because as a chief executive that's balanced ten budgets in a row, I've had to make those tough decisions and those tough choices.
First, I've suggested that there are certain weapons systems which we don't need and we can't afford.
Mr. Bush has been critical of me for that, but I think those are the kinds of tough choices you have to make.
I've also suggested that there are weapons systems that we should proceed on, and I've outlined those in detail.
Secondly, we've got to invest in economic growth in this country, in every part of this country.
Building that kind of growth expands revenues and helps to bring down that deficit.
Thirdly, we have to bring interest rates down, and we will as we come up with a good, solid plan with the Congress for bringing that deficit down.
And, finally, we've got to go out there and collect billions and billions of dollars in taxes owed that aren't being paid to this country.
It's very unfair to the average taxpayer who pays his taxes and pays them on time to permit these monies to go uncollected.
I've also suggested that on the domestic side there are areas where we can make some cuts.
We ought to be able to come up with an agricultural policy in this country that gives our farm families a fair price and a decent future without spending $20-25 billion a year, which is what we've been doing under this administration.
We can help people to live better lives, and at the same time save money by helping hundreds of thousands of families on welfare to get off or welfare, and to become productive citizens again.
The thing I don't understand about Mr. Bush's approach to this is how he could possibly be serious about bringing that deficit down given what he says he wants to do.
He seems to want to spend a great deal of money on just about every weapon system; he says he's against new taxes, although he's broken that pledge at least times in the last year that I know of; he wants to give the wealthiest taxpayers in this country a five year, $40 billion tax break.
He also wants to spend a lot of money on additional programs.
If he keeps this up, he's going to be the Joe Isuzu of American politics.
 But I hope you won't take my five seconds away from me.
I will say this -
 If he's serious about what he's saying, then the only place he can go to balance that budget is to raid the Social Security Trust Fund, and he tried that in 1985, and I think he's going to try it again.
 Is this the time to unleash our one-liners?
That answer was about as clear as Boston harbor.
 Let me help the governor.
There are so many things there, I don't quite know where to begin.
When you cut capital gains, you put people to work.
John Kennedy proposed cutting capital gains.
Paul Tsongas, a liberal senator from Massachusetts said the dumbest thing I did was to oppose the capital gains cut.
It's not going to cost the government money.
It's going to increase revenues to the federal government, and it's going to create jobs.
So that's one of the things that I think makes a big difference between us.
Massachusetts doesn't have an enormous defense budget, but nevertheless, the governor raised taxes five different times.
That happens to be a fact.
And so let's kind of stay on the issue, and I have made a specific proposal for what I call a flexible freeze.
And it permits - economists on the East Coast and West think it's good - it permits the president to sort out the priorities, and we continue to grow because I will not raise taxes.
 I think it's the Republican Party and my concern to bring it down.
And presidential leadership that I want to provide in this area will bring it down, but we've got to get the Democrats - Congress under control.
They do all the spending, they appropriate every dime and tell us how to spend every dime.
I'd like to ask the Governor to join in getting for the president what 43 governors have, the line-item veto.
He has to operate in Massachusetts under a balanced budget proviso.
I would like a balanced budget amendment.
But the dynamics of the economy - we cut the taxes and revenues are up by 25 percent in three years.
So the problem is - it's not that the working is being taxed too little or the person working out - the woman working in some factory being taxed too little.
It is that we are continuing to spend too much.
So, my formula says grow at the rate of inflation.
Permit the president to set the priorities on where we do the spending.
And remember the Federal deficit has come down $70 billion in one year, in 1987.
And if we - and the - actually this year Congress is doing a little better in controlling the growth of spending.
Spending was only up something like 4 percent.
So, it isn't that we're taking too little - from taxpayer - we're spending too much still.
And the formula I've given you works, we've put it through a good economic model, we've got good economists on the West Coast, Michael Boskin and Marty Feldstein up there who's a very respected economist in the - Massachusetts.
And they agree, that if we can do what I've said, we can get it down without going and socking the American taxpayer once again.
Capital gains, one more point on that, please let's learn from history.
A capital gains differential will increase jobs, increase risk taking, increase revenues to the Federal Government.
 Well, I hope all of those Americans out there who are watching us, listening to us and trying to make up their mind about which one of us ought to be president of the United States listen to the Vice President very carefully.
What he's proposing after over a trillion in new debt which has been added in the Federal debt in the course of the past eight years, an IOU our children and grandchildren will be paying for years, is a tax cut for the wealthiest one percent of the people in this country, an average of about $30,000 that we're going to give to people making $200,000 a year.
Why that's more than the average teacher makes.
We've had enough of that, ladies and gentlemen.
We've run up more debt in the last eight years than under all the presidents from George Washington to Jimmy Carter combined.
It's time for a chief executive who can make tough choices, can work with the Congress, can get that deficit down and begin to build a strong fiscal foundation under this country.
 One thing I will not do is sock every business in the country and, thus, throw some people out of work.
I want to keep this economic recovery going.
More Americans at work today than any time in history, a greater percentage of the work force.
What I will do is permit people to buy into Medicaid.
I believe that's the answer.
I am proud to have been part of an administration that past the first catastrophic health bill.
And in that there are some Medicaid provisions that will be very helpful to the very kind of people we're talking about here.
But we've got to keep going forward without killing off the engine and throwing people out of work.
So, the answer lies, it seems to me, in full enforcement of the catastrophic program.
It lies to me in flexibility in Medicaid so people at the lowest end can buy in there and get their needs covered and then it also - I do not want to see us mandate across the board that every company has to do this, because I really think that marginal operators are going to go say, "We can't make it."
And I think then you're going to see that people are put out of work.
All these programs - and this cost on his - is - was - I saw an estimate, I'd love to know what he thinks, $35 - $40 billion - and it seems to me that somebody pays that.
There isn't any such thing as something free out there.
It either gets passed along as increased prices or it gets passed along by people being put out of work so the business can continue to compete.
So, I think we ought to do it in the Medicaid system.
I think we ought to do it by full enforcement of the catastrophic health insurance.
I think we ought to do it by everybody doing what they can do out of conscience.
It's a terrible problems in terms of flexibility on private insurance.
But I just don't want to mandate it and risk putting this - setting the recovery back.
 But, George, that's no answer.
 You don't like the answer, but it's an answer.
 Well, no, it's no answer to those 37 million people, most of them members of working families who don't have a dime of health insurance and don't know how to pay the bills if their kids get sick at night.
I was in Houston on Tuesday meeting with a group of good citizens, working citizens.
All of them with little or no health insurance.
One of them was a father who had been laid off a few months ago and lost his health insurance.
Has an 11 year old son and can't let that son compete in sports and Little League, because he's afraid he's going to get hurt and he won't be able to provide health insurance to pay those bills.
My state just became the only state in the nation to provide for universal health care and we did it with the support of the business community and labor and the health care community and with virtually everybody in the state.
The fact of the matter is that employers who today are insuring their employees are paying the freight, because they're paying for those who aren't.
And I think it's time that when you got a job in this country it came with health insurance.
That's the way we're going to provide basic health security for all of the citizens of this country of ours.
 Well, Anne, let me just say before I answer your question that I didn't know that the Vice President attacked our program in Massachusetts.
I hope he hasn't.
Because has won the support of a great many people all over the state and I think it's a model for what I hope we can do across the country.
But when I proposed my plan this past Tuesday, he or one of his spokesmen called it socialized medicine.
The last time the Vice President used that phrase, I suspect he remembers it, don't you?
It was in 1964 and that's what he called Medicare.
Well, he was wrong then and he's wrong now.
(Applause)
 Let me say this about AIDS.
It's the single most important public health crisis, single most important public health emergency we've had in our lifetimes and I think there are a number of things we have to do including supporting legislation which is now moving through the Congress, which will commit this nation to the resources to find a cure which will provide broad education and prevention, which will provide sensitive and caring treatment for the victims of AIDS.
I think we have to demonstrate some flexibility and I think the FDA is attempting to do so now in trying to make it possible for new and experimental drugs to be available to people who are at risk at AIDS and I would hope that we could bring that kind of a policy to bear beginning in January.
And I would encourage the current administration to proceed with that kind of flexibility where it's appropriate and where it's done carefully and responsibly.
But we have not had the kind of leadership we should have had.
In this particular area, I think the Vice President and I are in general agreement on what we have to do.
The special Federal commission made good solid recommendations.
I think we're both supportive of them and I would strongly lead in that area as I have in my state as Governor.
 Well, we're on the right track.
The NIH is doing a good job in research.
The Surgeon General is doing a good job in encouraging the proper kind of education.
I notice that the Governor did not mention any testing.
But we got to have a knowledge base.
Testing should be confidential, but we have to have a knowledge.
We can't simply stick our heads in the sands in terms of testing.
I'm Chairman of the President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief and we are working with the FDA and they have sped up bringing drugs to market that can help.
And you got to be careful here, because there's a safety factor, but I think these things - and then also I am one who believes we've got to go the extra mile in clean - being sure that that blood supply is pure.
We cannot have a lack of confidence in the blood supply when it comes to operations and surgery and things of this nature.
So, research, speeding the drugs to market, testing, blood supply are very important elements of this.
 Passionless?
 Well, I don't question his passion.
I question - and I don't question his concern about the war in Vietnam.
He introduced or supported legislation back then that suggested that kids of Massachusetts should be exempt from going overseas in that war.
Now, that's a certain passion that in my view it's misguided passion.
He - we have a big difference on issues.
You see, last year in the primary, he expressed his passion.
He said, "I am a strong liberal Democrat" - August, '87.
Then he said, "I am a card-carrying member of the ACLU."
That was what he said.
He is out there on out of the mainstream.
He is very passionate.
My argument with the governor is, do we want this country to go that far left.
And I wish we had time to let me explain.
But I salute him for his passion.
We just have a big difference on where this country should be led, and in what direction it ought to go.
 Nothings wrong with it.
But just take a look at the positions of the ACLU.
But, Peter, please understand, the liberals do not like me talking about liberal They don't like it when I say that he says he's a card carrying member.
Now, if that quote was wrong, he can repudiate it, right here.
I've seen it authoritatively written twice, and if I've done him an injustice, and he didn't say it, I'm very, very sorry.
But I don't agree with a lot of - most of the positions of the ACLU.
I simply don't want to see the ratings on movies.
I don't want my ten year old grandchild to go into an X-rated movie.
I like those ratings systems.
I don't think they're right to try to take the tax exemption away from the Catholic Church.
I don't want to see the kiddie pornographic laws repealed; I don't want to see "under God" come out from our currency.
Now, these are all positions of the ACLU.
And I don't agree with them.
He has every right to exercise his passion, as what he said, a strong, progressive liberal.
I don't agree with that.
I come from a different point.
And I think I'm more in touch with the mainstream of America.
They raised the same thing with me on the Pledge of Allegiance.
You see, I'd have found a way to sign that bill.
Governor Thompson of Illinois did.
I'm not questioning his patriotism.
He goes out and says the man is questioning my patriotism.
And then all the liberal columnists join in.
I am not.
I am questioning his judgment on these matters, or where he's coming from He has every right to do it.
But I believe that's not what the American people want, and when he said, when he said at the convention, ideology doesn't matter, just competence, he was moving away from his own record, from what his passion has been over the years.
And that's all I'm trying to do, is put it in focus.
And I hope people don't think that I'm questioning his patriotism when I say he used his words to describe his participation in that organization.
 Well, I hope this is the first and last time I have to say this.
Of course, the vice president is questioning my patriotism.
I don't think there's any question about that, and I resent it.
I resent it.
My parents came to this country as immigrants.
They taught me that this was the greatest country in the world.
I'm in public service because I love this country.
I believe in it.
And nobody's going to question my patriotism as the vice president has now repeatedly.
The fact of the matter is if the Pledge of Allegiance was the acid test of one's patriotism--the vice president's been the presiding officer in the United States Senate for the past seven and a half years.
To the best of my knowledge he's never once suggested that a session of the Senate begin with the Pledge of Allegiance.
 Mr. Bush, I don't question your patriotism.
When you're attacked for your military record, I immediately said it was inappropriate, it had no place in this campaign, and I rejected it.
I would hope that from this point on, we get to the issues that affect the vast majority of Americans, jobs, schools, health care, housing, the environment.
Those are the concerns of the people that are watching us tonight.
Not labels that we attach to each other, questions about each other's patriotism and loyalty.
 I want to see the McKinney Act fully funded.
I believe that that would help in terms of shelter.
I want to see - when I talked at our convention about a thousand points of light, I was talking about the enormous numbers of shelters and organizations that help.
The governor's wife has been very active in the homeless.
My campaign chairman, Secretary Jim Baker's wife.
This isn't government.
These are people that care, that are trying to give of themselves.
The government has a role.
It is to fully fund the McKinney Act.
There are certain army bases that the act calls for that can be used in certain cases to shelter people when it's rough.
And so I think that we're on the right track.
I don't see this, incidentally, as a Democrat or a Republican or a liberal or conservative idea.
I see an involvement by a thousand points of light.
I see the funding that is required, and I hope the Congress will fully fund this bill.
They gave it a great deal of conscience and a great deal of work.
And we're on the track on this one.
But - and I, look, mental - that was a little overstated it.
I'd say around 30 percent.
And I think maybe we could look back over our shoulders and wonder whether it was right to let all those mental patients out.
Maybe we need to do a better job in mental clinics to help them.
Because there is a major problem there.
A lot of them are mentally sick.
And we've got to attend to them.
But fully, my short range answer is fully fund that McKinney Act.
 Well, this is another fundamental difference that I have with the vice president, just as I do in the case of health care for 37 million members of working families in this country who don't have health insurance.
The problem, Mr. Bush, is that you've cut back by 90 percent on our commitment to affordable housing for families of low and moderate income.
And when you do that, you've have homeless families.
We didn't have two and a half million, or three million homeless people living on streets and in doorways in this country ten years ago.
We've got to begin to get back to the business of building and rehabilitating housing for families of low and moderate income in this country; housing for young families that they can look forward some day to buy.
We've got communities in this country increasingly where our own kids can't afford to live in the communities that they grew up in.
That's an essential commitment.
And I think the housing community is ready.
But it's going to take a president who's committed to housing, who's had experience in building and rehabilitating housing who understands that affordable housing for families of low and moderate income, for young families, first time home buyers, is an essential part of the American dream.
And while I'm all for the McKinney bill, that, by itself, simply won't do.
We've got to have a president that can lead on this issue, that can work with the Congress, and I'm prepared to do so.
This is one of the most important priorities that faces this country.
 Well, I certainly hope not.
And it's all a question of what our priorities are.
Mr. Bush talked about values.
I agree with him.
What are our values?
Isn't providing housing for families of low and moderate income, isn't it making possible for young families, first time home buyers to own their own home some day something that's part of the American dream?
I think so.
You know, back after World War II when we had hundreds of thousands of GIs who came back from the war, we didn't sit around.
We went out and built housing.
The government was very much involved; so was the housing industry; so was the banking industry; so were housing advocates; so were non-profit agencies; so were governors and mayors and people all over this country who believe deeply in home ownership and affordable housing.
Now, that's the kind of leadership that I want to provide as president of the United States.
This isn't a question of a little charity for the homeless.
This is a question of organizing the housing community.
I've talked to bankers and builders and developers, the housing advocates, community development agencies, and they want leadership from Washington.
Washington, by itself, can't do it all.
We shouldn't expect that.
But governors are ready; mayors are ready.
Builders and community leaders are ready.
It will require some funds, John.
And we ought to be prepared to provide those funds.
But that, too, will require some choices.
Mr. Bush wants to spend billions and trillions on Star Wars.
Well, that's a choice we have to make, isn't it?
Do we spend money on that weapon system in the billions and trillions, or is providing some decent and affordable housing for families of this country something that is at least as important and probably more so.
Because it's so essential to our economic strength and to our future.
Now, that's the kind of presidency I believe in.
And simply to say, well, the McKinney bill will do it just doesn't do.
We need a president who will lead on this issue, who has had experience on this issue.
It's the kind of priority that will be at the top of our list beginning in January of 1989.
 I think the governor is blurring housing and the homeless.
Let's talk about housing which the question was.
When you talk to those bankers, did they discuss where interest rates were when your party controlled the White House?
Ten days before I took the oath of office as president they were 21 and a half percent.
Now, how does that grab you for increasing housing?
Housing is up.
We are serving a million more families now.
But we're not going to do it in that old Democratic, liberal way of trying to build more bricks and mortars.
Go out and take a look at St. Louis at some of that effort.
It is wrong.
I favor home ownership.
I want to see more vouchers.
I want to see control of some of these projects, and I want to keep the interest rates down.
They're half, now of what they were when we came into office, and with my policy of getting this deficit under control, they'll be a lot less.
But if we spend and spend and spend, that is going to wrap up the housing market, and we'll go right back to the days of the misery index and malaise that President Reagan and I have overcome - thank God for the United States on that one.
 No, I don't think there is.
There are two very different issues here, and they've got to be dealt with separately.
I'm opposed to the death penalty.
I think everybody knows that.
I'm also very tough on violent crime.
And that's one of the reasons why my state has cut crime by more than any other industrial state in America.
It's one of the reasons why we have the lowest murder rate of any industrial state in the country.
It's one of the reasons why we have a drug education and prevention program that is reaching out and helping youngsters all over our state, the kind of thing I want to do as president of the United States.
You know, the vice president says he wants to impose the death penalty on drug traffickers, and yet his administration has a federal furlough program which is one of the most permissive in the country, which gave last year 7,000 furloughs to drug traffickers and drug pushers, the same people that he says he now wants to execute.
The issue of abortion is a very difficult issue, one that I think that we all have to wrestle with, we have to come to terms with.
I don't favor abortion.
I don't think it's a good thing.
I don't think most people do.
The question is who makes the decision.
And I think it has to be the woman, in the exercise of her own conscience and religious beliefs, that makes that decision.
 Well, the Massachusetts furlough program was unique.
It was the only one in the nation that furloughed murderers who had not served enough time to be eligible for parole.
The federal program doesn't do that.
No other state programs do that.
And I favor the death penalty.
I know it's tough and honest people can disagree.
But when a narcotics wrapped up guy goes in and murders a police officer, I think they ought to pay with their life.
And I do believe it would be inhibiting.
And so I am not going to furlough men like Willie Horton, and I would meet with their, the victims of his last escapade, the rape and the brutalization of the family down there in Maryland.
Maryland would not extradite Willie Horton, the man who was furloughed, the murderer, because they didn't want him to be furloughed again.
And so we have a fundamental difference on this one.
And I think most people know my position on the sanctity of life.
I favor adoption.
I do not favor abortion.
 I haven't sorted out the penalties.
But I do know, I do know that I oppose abortion.
And I favor adoption.
And if we can get this law changed, everybody should make the extraordinary effort to take these kids that are unwanted and sometimes aborted, take the - let them come to birth, and then put them in a family where they will be loved.
And you see, yes, my position has evolved.
And it's continuing to evolve, and it's evolving in favor of life.
And I have had a couple of exceptions that I support - rape, incest and the life of the mother.
Sometimes people feel a little uncomfortable talking about this, but it's much clearer for me now.
As I've seen abortions sometimes used as a birth control device, for heavens sakes.
See the millions of these killings accumulate, and this is one where you can have an honest difference of opinion.
We certainly do.
But no, I'm for the sanctity of life, and once that illegality is established, then we can come to grips with the penalty side, and of course there's got to be some penalties to enforce the law, whatever they may be.
 Well, I think what the vice president is saying is that he's prepared to brand a woman a criminal for making this decision.
It's as simple as that.
I don't think it's enough to come before the American people who are watching us tonight and say, well, I haven't sorted it out.
This is a very, very difficult and fundamental decision that all of us have to make.
And what he is saying, if I understand him correctly, is that he's prepared to brand a woman a criminal for making this choice.
 I just -
 Let me finish.
Let me simply say that I think it has to be the woman in the exercise of her own conscience and religious beliefs that makes that decision, and I think that's the right approach, the right decision, and I would hope by this time that Mr. Bush had sorted out this issue and come to terms with it as I have.
I respect his right to disagree with me.
But I think it's important that we have a position, that we take it, and we state it to the American people.
 One of the reasons, and I first would like to know which programs you're talking about, and then we could talk on the merits of the programs.
But, you see, my fundamental philosophy is give local and state government as much control as possible.
That might be the explanation, if you tell me the program.
I do strongly support the WIC program.
I think it is good.
I think part of the answer to this haunting of these children that are out there and suffering lies in extension of Medicaid, to challenge the states, and maybe we're going to have to enforce more on the states in terms of Medicaid taking care of these.
But, Peter, so much of it is, gets into a whole other phase of things.
The neighborhood, the kind of environment people are growing up in, and that leads me to the programs I'm talking about in terms of education.
I think that part of it is the crime infested neighborhoods, and that's why I'm a strong believer in trying to control crimes in the neighborhood, why I was so pleased to be endorsed by the policemen on the beat, the Boston Police Department the other day.
I think they understand my commitment to helping them in the neighborhoods.
And so it's a combination of these things.
But do not erode out of the system the thousand points of light.
The people that are out there trying to help these kids, the programs like cities and schools, the work that Barbara Bush is doing so people can learn to read in this country and then go on and break this cycle of poverty.
I'm for Head Start and moving that up.
And I've already made a proposal - and yes, it will cost some money.
But I favor that.
So these are the combination of things I want, and the fact that I don't think the federal government can endorse a $35 billion program does not mean I have less compassion than the person who endorses such a program.
 Well, I must have been living through a different eight years then the ones the vice president's been living through, because this administration has cut and slashed and cut and slashed programs for children, for nutrition, for the kinds of things that can help these youngsters to live better lives.
It's cut federal aid to education; it's cut Pell grants and loans to close the door to college opportunity on youngsters all over this country.
And that, too, is a major difference between the vice president and me.
Let me just give you one other example.
We have a great many people, hundreds of thousands of people living on public assistance in this country.
The 50 governors of this nation have proposed to the Congress that we help those families to get off of welfare, help those youngsters, help their mothers to become independent and self-sufficient.
It's taken months and months and months to get Mr. Bush and the administration to support that legislation, and they're still resisting.
That's the way you help people.
Being haunted, a thousand points of light - I don't know what that means.
I know what strong political leadership is.
I know what's happened over the course of the past eight years.
These programs have been cut and slashed and butchered, and they've hurt kids all over this country.
 Well, I said a few minutes ago, Peter, that you could improve the lives of families and youngsters and save money at the same time.
Welfare reform is one way to do it.
If we invest in job training, in child care for those youngsters, in some extended health benefits so that that mother and her kids don't lose their health benefits when she goes to work, we can help literally hundreds of thousands, if not millions of families, to get off of welfare, to become independent and self-sufficient, to be taxpaying citizens, and to improve their lives, the quality of lives, their futures, and the futures of those children.
 What troubles me is that when I talk of the voluntary sector and a thousand points of light and a thousand different ways to help on these problems, the man has just said he doesn't understand what I'm talking about.
 Of course not.
Of course that's a charge that's always made against any governor who runs for the presidency.
I think it was one of the things that Mr. Bush said about Mr. Reagan back in 1980.
Remember that, George?
And yet some of our finest presidents, some of our strongest international leaders were governors-Franklin Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Theodore Roosevelt.
 Well, I thought the question was about defense.
The governor was for a nuclear freeze that would have locked in a thousand Soviet intermediate nuclear force weapons and zero for the West.
And because we didn't listen to the freeze advocates, and strengthen the defense of this country, we now have the first arms control agreement in the nuclear age.
Now, we're sitting down and talking to the Soviets about strategic arms, and he wants to do away with the Midgetman and the MX, the modernization or our nuclear capability.
That is not the way you deal with the Soviets.
I've met Mr. Gorbachev.
Met Mr. Shevardnadze and talked substance with him the other day.
These people are tough.
But now we have a chance.
I few have experience and now how to handle it, but please do not go back to the days when the military was as weak as they could be, when the morale was down, and when we were the laughing stock around the world.
 And he just lifted martial law.
And he just called for new elections.
And all of those things happened because the Philippines do crave democracy.
And out he goes.
 I don't think it's a question of eliminating.
I can tell him some I'm against.
A-6F, for example.
DIVAD.
And I can go on and on.
Minuteman III, penetration systems.
I mean, there's plenty of them that I oppose, but what I am not going to do, when we are negotiating with the Soviet Union, sitting down talking to Mr. Gorbachev about how we achieve a 50 percent reduction in our strategic weapons, I'm not going to give away a couple of aces I that very tough card game.
I'm simply not going to do that.
 Wouldn't it be nice to be perfect?
 I hope it isn't Christmas when you make that decision.
 wouldn't it be nice to be the ice man so you never make a mistake?
These are the-my answer is do not make these unilateral cuts, and everybody now realizes that peace through strength works, and so this is where I have a big difference.
 Well, first let me say with respect to the freeze, that back in the spring of 1982 Mr. Bush was a lot more sympathetic to the freeze than he seems to be today.
As a matter of fact, he said it was not and should not be subject to partisan demagoguery because it was too important for the United States or for the world.
I didn't hear, John, exactly where he was going to cut and what he was going to do.
 What I think we ought to do is take a look at perestroika and glasnost, welcome them, but keep our eyes open.
Be cautious.
Because the Soviet change is not fully established yet.
Yes, I think it's fine to do business with them.
And, so, I'm encouraged with what I see when I talk to Mr. -- what I hear when I talk to Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Shevardnadze, but can they pull it off.
 It was a very different George Bush who was talking much more sympathetically about the freeze in the spring of 1982 than he is today.
And you were right then, George, when you said it was no time for partisan demagoguery.
Nobody is suggesting that we unilaterally disarm or somehow reduce our strength, of course not.
What we're talking about is a combination of a strong and effective and credible nuclear deterrent.
Strong, well-equipped, well-trained, well-maintained conventional forces.
And at the same time a willingness to move forward steadily, thoughtfully cautiously.
 No, there's been no change of heart.
I said from the beginning that we ought to continue research into the strategic system at about the level that was added in 1983, that's about a billion dollars a year.
But I don't know of any reputable scientist who believed that this system, at least as originally conceived could possibly work, this notion of some kind of astrodome over ourselves that could protect us from enemy attack.
It makes real sense.
And as a matter of fact, the system that the administration is now talking about is very different from the one that was originally proposed in 1983.
 I'm not reconsidering my position.
Two questions: How do you deter nuclear attack without modernizing our nuclear forces when the Soviets are modernizing and how come you spend-willing to spend a dime on something that you consider a fantasy and a fraud.
Those are two hypo-rhetorical questions.
 He's got to get this thing more clear.
Why do you spend a billion dollars on something you think is a fantasy and a fraud?
I will fully research it, go forward as fast as we can.
We've set up the levels of funding and when it is deployable, I will deploy it.
That is my position on SDI and it's never wavered a bit.
 Peter, it's one of the most agonizing decisions a president has to make.
These are American citizens, we care deeply about them.
Their families care deeply about them, want them back and understandably so and we want to do everything we can to bring them back.
 I wrote the anti-terrorist report for this government.
It is the best anti-terrorist report written.
Yes, we shouldn't trade arms for hostages.
But we have made vast improvements in our anti-terrorism.
Now, it's fine to say that sometimes you have to hit base camps, but when the president saw this state sponsored-fingerprints of Muammar Khadaffi on the loss of American life, he hit Libya.
And my opponent was unwilling to support that action.
 That's not true.
That's not true.
 And since that action, terrorist action against the United States citizens have gone down.
 That's not true.
 And I have long ago said I supported the president on this other matter.
And I've said mistakes were made.
Clearly nobody's going to think the president started out thinking he was going to trade arms for hostages.
That is a very serious charge against the president.
The matter has been thoroughly looked into.
But the point is sometimes the action-
 - has to be taken by the Federal Government and when we took action, it had a favorable response.
 You're judged by the whole record.
You're judged by the entire record.
Are we closer to peace?
Are we doing better in anti-terrorism?
Should we have listened to my opponent who wanted to send the UN into the Persian Gulf or in spite of the mistakes of the past, are we doing better there?
How is our credibility with the GCC countries on the Western side of the Gulf.
Is Iran talking to Iraq about peace?
You judge on the record.
Are the Soviets coming out of Afghanistan?
How does it look in a program he called or some one of these marvelous Boston adjective up there and-about Angola-now, we have a chance-several Bostonians don't like it, but the rest of the country will understand.
 Now we have a chance.
Now we have a chance.
And, so, I think that I'd leave it right there and say that you judge on the whole record.
And let me say this-all he can talk about-he goes around ranting about Noriega.
Now, I've told you what the intelligence briefing he received said about that.
He can talk about Iran/Contra and also-I'll make a deal with you, I will take the blame for those two incidents if you give me half the credit for all the good things that have happened in world peace since Ronald Reagan and I took over from the Carter administration.
 I still have a couple of minutes left.
And there is a difference principle -
 It's only on yellow here.
Wait a minute.
 Jim -
 I said I wasn't perfect.
Where was I?
 25th of December, Mr. Vice President.
 I finished.
 He can have another ten seconds if he wants, Jim.
 Well, the matter of judgment is very important.
And I think it's important to understand what happened here.
 I see a young man that was elected to the Senate twice, to the House of Representatives twice.
I see a man who is young and I am putting my confidence in a whole generation of people that are in their 30s and 40s.
I see a man that took the leadership in the Job Training Partnership Act and that retrains people in this highly competitive changing society we're in, so if a person loses his hob he is retrained for a benefit-for a-work that will be productive and he won't have to go on one of these many programs that the liberal-talking about.
 Well, when it comes to ridicule, George, you win a gold medal.
I think we can agree on that in the course of this campaign.
 Just the facts.
 But did I-did I sense a desire that maybe Lloyd Bentsen ought to be your running mate when you said there are three people on your ticket?
 No, I think the debate ought to be between you and Lloyd.
 I think the American people have a right to judge us on this question, on how we picked a running mate, a person who is a heartbeat away from the presidency.
I picked Lloyd Bentsen, distinguished, strong, mature, a leader in the Senate, somebody whose qualifications nobody has questioned.
Mr. Bush picked Dan Quayle.
 I did indeed.
 Well, John, I'm a man that's been a chief executive for ten years.
I've picked a lot of people.
I've picked cabinets.
I've named judges.
I know that the people you pick make an enormous difference in your ability to govern and I set high standards.
I try to meet them and I insist that people who work for me meet them, if they don't, they don't stick around very long.
 Well, I-we obviously have a difference.
I believe it does meet the test.
We'll have an opportunity to see the two of them in action in a friendly forum, wonderful friendly fashion like this.
 I had hoped this had been a little friendlier evening.
I wanted to hitchhike a ride home in his tank with him.
But now we've got the lines too carefully drawn here.
But you talk about judgment.
I mean, what kind of judgment-I mean, jumping all over the president on his decision on one area of farm policy.
What kind of judgment sense has your chief education adviser now in jail in Massachusetts?
I mean, there's-I don't think this is a fair argument.
But nevertheless, I support my nominee for Vice President and he'll do an outstanding job.
 Well, I think we have to go to work on the problem of Third World debt and we've got to assist those Third World countries in dealing with this massive debt which they currently-which they have incurred and which is burdening them and which if we don't do something about it and assist them along with other nations around the world, we'll destroy their economies, destroy their future.
And at the same time will destroy markets that are important to our farmers.
 I oppose supply management and production controls.
I support the farm bill, the 1985 farm bill and spending is moving in the right direction.
I want to expand our markets abroad and that's why I've called for that first economic summit to be on agriculture.
 I talked in New Orleans about a gentler and kinder nation and I have made specific proposals on education and the environment and on ethics and energy and how we do better in battling crime in our country.
But there are two main focal points of this election.
Opportunity and peace.
 This has been an extraordinary 18 months for Kitty and me and for our family.
We've had an opportunity to campaign all over this country and to meet with so many of you in communities and states and regions to get to know you.
I'm more optimistic today than I was when I began about this nation providing we have the kind of leadership in Washington that can work with you, that can build partnerships, that can build jobs in every part of this country, not certain parts of this country.
 I think the principal that separates me is that 5 and a half million people came together on their own and put me on the ballot.
I was not put on the ballot by either of the 2 parties; I was not put on the ballot by any PAC money, by any foreign lobbyist money, by any special interest money.
This is a movement that came from the people.
This is the way the framers of the Constitution intended our government to be, a government that comes from the people.
Over time we have developed a government that comes at the people, that comes from the top down, where the people are more or less treated as objects to be programmed during the campaign with commercials and media events and fear messages and personal attacks and things of that nature.
The thing that separates my candidacy and makes it unique is that this came from millions of people in 50 states all over this country who wanted a candidate that worked and belonged to nobody but them.
I go into this race as their servant, and I belong to them.
So this comes from the people.
 The most important distinction in this campaign is that I represent real hope for change, a departure from trickle-down economics, a departure from tax and spend economics, to invest in growth.
But before I can do that, I must challenge the American people to change, and they must decide.
Tonight I say to the President: Mr. Bush, for 12 years you've had it your way.
You've had your chance and it didn't work.
It's time to change.
I want to bring that change to the American people.
But we must all decide first we have the courage to change for hope and a better tomorrow.
 Well, I think one thing that distinguishes is experience.
I think we've dramatically changed the world.
I'll talk about that a little bit later, but the changes are mind-boggling for world peace.
Kids go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war.
And change for change sake isn't enough.
We saw that message in the late 70s when heard a lot about change, and what happened, that misery index went right through the roof.
But my economic program is the kind of change we want.
And the way we're going to get it done is we're going to have a brand new Congress.
A lot of them are thrown out because of all the scandals.
I'll sit down with them, Democrats and Republicans alike, and work for my agenda for American renewal, which represents real change.
But I'd say, if you had to separate out, I think it's experience at this level.
 I believe experience counts, but it's not everything.
Values, judgment, and the record that I have amassed in my state also should count for something.
I've worked hard to create good jobs and to educate people.
My state now ranks first in the country in job growth this year, fourth in income growth, fourth in reduction of poverty, third in overall economic performance, according to a major news magazine.
That's because we believe in investing in education and in jobs.
And we have to change in this country.
You know, my wife, Hillary, gave me a book about a year ago in which the author defined insanity as just doing the same old thing over and over again and expecting a different result.
We have got to have the courage to change.
Experience is important, yes.
I've gotten a lot of good experience in dealing with ordinary people over the last year and month.
I've touched more people's lives and seen more heartbreak and hope, more pain and more promise, than anybody else who's run for president this year.
I think the American people deserve better than they're getting.
We have gone from first to thirteenth in wages in the world in the last twelve years, since Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan have been in.
Personal income has dropped while people have worked harder.
In the last four years, there have been twice as many bankruptcies as new jobs created.
We need a new approach.
The same old experience is not relevant.
We're living in a new world after the Cold War, and what works in this new world is not trickle down, not government for the benefit of the privileged few, not tax and spend, but a commitment to invest in American jobs and American education, controlling American health care costs, and bringing the American people together.
That is what works.
And you can have the right kind of experience and the wrong kind of experience.
Mine is rooted in the real lives of real people, and it will bring real results if we have the courage to change.
 I just thought of another -- another big difference here between me.
I don't believe Mr. Perot feels this way, but I know Governor Clinton did because I want to accurately quote him.
He thinks, I think he said, that the country is coming apart at the seams.
Now, I know that the only way he can win is to make everybody believe the economy's worse than it is.
But this country is not coming apart at the seams, for heaven's sakes.
We're the United States of America.
In spite of the economic problems, we're the most respected economy around the world.
Many would trade for it.
We've been caught up in a global slowdown.
We can do much, much better, but we ought not try to convince the American people that America is a country that's coming apart at the seams.
I would hate to be running for president and think that the only way I could win would be to convince everybody how horrible things are.
Yes, there are big problems, and yes, people are hurting.
But I believe that this Agenda for American renewal I have is the answer to do it, and I believe we can get it done now, whereas we didn't in the past, because you're going to have a whole brand new bunch of people in the Congress that are going to have to listen to the same American people I'm listening to.
 Well, they've got a point.
I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt.
(Laughter.)
I don't have any experience in gridlock government where nobody takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else.
I don't have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the industrialized world, the most violent crime-ridden society in the industrialized world.
 But I do have a lot of experience in getting things done.
So, if we're at a point in history where we want to stop talking about it and do it, I've got a lot of experience in figuring out how to solve problems, making the solutions work, and then moving on to the next one.
I've got a lot of experience in not taking 10 years to solve a 10-minute problem.
So, if it's time for action, I think I have experience that counts.
If there's more time for gridlock and talk and finger pointing, I'm the wrong man.
 I think the American people should be the judge of that.
I think character is a very important question.
I said something the other day where I was accused of being like Joe McCarthy because I questioned -- I put it this way; I think it's wrong to demonstrate against your own country or organize demonstrations against your own country in foreign soil.
I just think it's wrong.
I -- well, maybe they say, "Well, it was a youthful indiscretion."
I was 19 or 20 flying off an aircraft carrier and that shaped me to be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.
And I'm sorry, but demonstrating -- it's not a question of patriotism.
It's a question of character and judgment.
They get on me -- Bill's gotten on me about, "read my lips."
When I make a mistake I'll admit it.
But he has made -- not admitted a mistake and I just find it impossible to understand how an American can demonstrate against his own country in a foreign land -- organizing demonstrations against it when young men are held prisoner in Hanoi or kids out of the ghetto were drafted.
Some say, "well, you're a little old fashioned."
Maybe I am, but I just don't think that's right.
Now, whether it's character or judgment -- whatever it is -- I have a big difference here on this issue and so we'll just have to see how it plays out.
But I -- I couldn't do that.
And I don't think most Americans could do that.
And they all say, "Well, it was a long time ago."
Well, let's admit it then.
Say, "I made a terrible mistake."
How could you be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and have some kid say -- when you have to make a tough decision, as I did in Panama or Kuwait and then have some kid jump up and say, "Well, I'm not going to go.
The Commander-in-Chief was organizing demonstrations halfway around the world during another era.
So there are differences but that's about the main area where I think we have a difference.
I don't know about -- we'll talk about that a little with Ross here in a bit.
 I think the American people will make their own decisions on character and at a time when we have work to do and we need action I think they need to clearly understand the backgrounds of each person.
I think the press can play a huge roll in making sure that the backgrounds are clearly presented in an objective way.
Then, make a decision.
Certainly anyone in the White House should have the character to be there.
But, I think it's very important to measure when and where things occurred.
Did they occur when you were a young person, in your formative years?
Or did they occur while you were a senior official in the federal government?
When youre a senior official in the federal government spending billions of dollars in taxpayers money and youre a mature individual and you make a mistake, then that was on our ticket.
If you make it as a young man, time passes.
So I would say just, you know, look at all three of us.
Decide who you think will do the job.
Pick that person in November because believe me, as I've said before, "The party's over and it's time for the clean-up crew."
And we do have to have change and people who never take responsibility for anything when it happens on their watch and people who are in charge --
 The time is up.
(Laughter).
 More later.
 Ross gave a good answer but I've got to respond directly to Mr. Bush.
You have questioned my patriotism.
 (Inaudible).
 You even brought some right-wing congressman into the White House to plot how to attack me for going to Russia in 1969-70, when over 50,000 other Americans did.
Now, I honor your service in World War II, I honor Mr. Perot's service in uniform and the service of every man and woman who ever served, including Admiral Crowe, who was your Chairman of the joint Chiefs and who's supporting me.
But when Joe McCarthy went around this country attacking people's patriotism he was wrong.
He was wrong.
And a senator from Connecticut stood up to him named Prescott Bush.
Your father was right to stand up to Joe McCarthy, you were wrong to attack my patriotism.
I was opposed to the war but I loved my country and we need a president who will bring this country together, not divide it.
We've had enough division.
I want to lead a unified country.
 The tax increase I have proposed triggers in at family incomes of $200,000 and above.
Those are the people who in the 1980s had their incomes go up while their taxes went down.
Middle-class people, defined as people with incomes of $52,000 and down, had their incomes go down while their taxes went up in the Reagan-Bush years because of 6 increases in the payroll taxes.
So that is where my income limit would trigger.
 Right.
My plan -
 --notwithstanding my opponent's ad, my plan triggers in at gross incomes, family incomes of $200,000 and above.
Then we want to give modest middle-class tax relief to restore some fairness, especially to middle- class people with families with incomes of under $60,000.
In addition to that, the money that I raise from upper-income people and from asking foreign corporations just to pay the same income on their income earned in America that American corporations do will be used to give incentives back to upper-income people.
I want to give people permanent incentives on investment tax credit, like President Kennedy and the Congress inaugurated in the early '60s to get industry moving again; a research and development tax credit; a low-income housing tax credit; a long-term capital gains proposal for new business and business expansions.
We've got to have no more trickle down.
We don't need across-the-board tax cuts for the wealthy for nothing.
We need to say here's your tax incentive: if you create American jobs, the old-fashioned way.
I'd like to create more millionaires than were created under Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan, but I don't want to have 4 years where we have no growth in the private sector, and that's what's happened in the last 4 years.
We're down 35,000 jobs in the private sector.
We need to invest and grow, and that's what I want to do.
 Well, let me--I have to correct one thing.
I didn't question the man's patriotism.
I questioned his judgment and his character.
What he did in Moscow, that's fine.
Let him explain it.
He did.
I accept that.
What I don't accept is demonstrating and organizing demonstrations in a foreign country when your country's at war.
I'm sorry.
I cannot accept that.
In terms of this one on taxes spells out the biggest difference between us.
I do not believe we need to go back to the Mondale proposals or the Dukakis proposals of tax and spend.
Governor Clinton says $200,000 but he also says he wants to raise $150 billion.
Taxing people over $200,000 will not get you $150 billion.
And then when you add in his other spending proposals, regrettably you end up socking it to the working man.
That old adage they use--we're going to soak the rich- -we're going to soak the rich--it always ends up being the poor cab driver or the working man that ends up paying the bill.
And so I just have a different approach.
I believe the way to get the deficit down is to control the growth of mandatory spending programs, and not raise taxes on the American people.
We've got a big difference there.
 We've got to have a growing, expanding job base to give us a growing, expanding tax base.
Right now we have a flat to deteriorating job base and where it appears to be growing, it's minimum-wage jobs.
So we've got to really rebuild our job base.
That's going to take money for infrastructure and investment to do that.
Our foreign competitors are doing it; we're not.
We cannot pay off the $4 trillion debt, balance the budget and have the industries of the future and the high- paying jobs in this country without having the revenue.
We're going to go through a period of shared sacrifice.
There's one challenge.
It's got to be fair.
We've created a mess, don't have much to show for it and we have got to fix it.
And that's about all I can say in a minute.
 Well, Sander, that's a good question, and the answer is: for 40-some years we kept the peace.
If you look at the cost of not keeping the peace in Europe, it would be exorbitant.
We have reduced the number of troops that are deployed and going to be deployed.
I have cut defense spending.
And the reason we could do that is because of our fantastic success in winning the Cold War.
We never would have got there if we had gone for the nuclear freeze crowd; we never would have got there if we had listened to those that wanted to cut defense spending.
I think it is important that the US stay in Europe and continue to guarantee the peace.
We simply cannot pull back.
Now, when anybody has a spending program they want to spend money on at home, they say, well, let's cut money out of the Defense Dept.
I will accept and have accepted the recommendations of 2 proven leaders, General Colin Powell and Secretary Dick Cheney.
They feel that the levels we're operating at and the reductions that I have proposed are proper.
And so I simply do not think we should go back to the isolation days and starting blaming foreigners.
We are the sole remaining superpower, and we should be that.
And we have a certain disproportionate responsibility.
But I would ask the American people to understand that if we make imprudent cuts, if we go too far, we risk the peace.
And I don't want to do that.
I've seen what it is like to see a war, to see the burdens of a war, and I don't want to see us make reckless cuts.
Because of our programs we have been able to significantly cut defense spending.
But let's not cut into the muscle, and let's not cut down our insurance policy, which is participation of American forces in NATO, the greatest peace- keeping organization ever made.
Today you've got problems in Europe, still bubbling along even though Europe's gone democracy's route.
But we are there, and I think this insurance policy is necessary.
I think it goes with world leadership, and I think the levels we've come up with are just about right.
 If I'm poor and you're rich, and I can get you to defend me, that's good.
But when the tables get turned, I ought to do my share.
Right now we spend about $300 billion a year on defense, the Japanese spend around 30 billion in Asia, the Germans spend around 30 billion in Europe.
For example, Germany will spend a trillion dollars building infrastructure over the next 10 years.
It's kind of easy to do if you only have to pick up a $30-billion tab to defend your country.
The European Community is in a position to pay a lot more than they have in the past.
I agree with the president: when they couldn't, we should have; now that they can, they should.
We sort of seem to have a desire to try to stay over there and control it.
They don't want us to control it, very candidly.
So it I think is very important for us to let them assume more and more of the burden and for us to bring that money back here and rebuild our infrastructure, because we can only be a superpower if we are an economic superpower; and we can only be an economic superpower if we have a growing, expanding job base.
 I agree with the general statement Mr. Bush made.
I disagree that we need 150,000 troops to fulfill our role in Europe.
We certainly must maintain an engagement there.
There are certainly dangers there, there are certainly other trouble spots in the world which are closer to Europe than to the US.
But 2 former defense secretaries recently issued a report saying that 100,000 or slightly fewer troops would be enough, including President Reagan's former defense secretary, Mr. Carlucci.
Many of the military experts whom I consulted on this agreed.
We're going to have to spend more money in the future on military technology and on greater mobility, greater airlift, greater sealift, the B-22 airplane.
We're going to have to do some things that are quite costly.
And I simply don't believe we can afford nor do we need to keep 150,000 troops in Europe given how much the Red Army, now under the control of Russia, has been cut, the arms control agreement concluded between Mr. Bush and Mr. Yeltsin, something I have applauded.
I don't think we need 150,000 troops.
Let me make one other point.
Mr. Bush talked about taxes.
He didn't tell you that he vetoed a middle class tax cut because it would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy and vetoed an investment tax credit paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy.
 It's 10 cents a year cumulative.
It finally gets to 50 cents at the end of the 5th year.
I think "punish" is the wrong word.
Again, see, I didn't create this problem.
We're trying to solve it.
Now, if you study our international competitors, some of our international competitors collect up to $3.50 a gallon in taxes, and they use that money to build infrastructure and to create jobs.
We collect 35 cents, and we don't have it to spend.
I know it's not popular, and I understand the nature of your question.
But the people who will be helped the most by it are the working people who will get the jobs created because of this tax.
Why do we have to do it?
Because we have so mismanaged our country over the years, and it is now time to pay the fiddler.
And if we don't, we will be spending our children's money.
We have spent $4 trillion worth.
An incredible number of young people are active in supporting my effort because they are deeply concerned that we have taken the American dream from them.
I think it's fitting that we're on the campus of a university tonight.
These young people, when they get out of this wonderful university, will have difficulty finding a job.
We've got to clean this mess up, leave this country in good shape, and pass on the American dream to them.
We've got to collect the taxes to do it.
If there's a fairer way, I'm all ears (laughter) --aah.
(Laughter and applause) But--but--see, let me make it very clear.
If people don't have the stomach to fix these problems, I think it's a good time to face it, November.
If they do, then they will have heard the harsh reality of what we have to do.
I'm not playing Lawrence Welk music tonight.
 I think Mr. Perot has confronted this deficit issue, but I think it's important to point out that we really have 2 deficits in America, not one.
We have a budget deficit in the federal government, but we also have an investment, a jobs, an income deficit.
People are working harder for less money than they were making 10 years ago, 2- 3rds of our people--a $1600 drop in average income in just the last 2 years.
The problem I have with the Perot prescription is that almost all economists who've looked at it say that if you cut the deficit this much this quick it will increase unemployment, it will slow down the economy.
That's why I think we shouldn't do it that quickly.
We have a disciplined reduction in the deficit of 50 % over the next 4 years, but first get incentives to invest in this economy, put the American people back to work.
We've got to invest and grow.
9 Nobel Prize-winning economists and 500 others, including numerous Republican and Democratic business executives, have endorsed this approach because it offers the best hope to put America back to work and get our incomes rising instead of falling.
 Your question was on fairness.
I just disagree with Mr. Perot.
I don't believe it is fair to slap a 50-cent-a-gallon tax over whatever many years on the people that have to drive for a living, people that go long distances.
I don't think we need to do it.
You see, I have a fundamental difference.
I agree with what he's talking about in trying to get this spending down and the discipline, although I think we ought to totally exempt Social Security.
But he's talking tough medicine, and I think that's good.
I disagree with the tax-and-spend philosophy.
You see, I don't think we need to tax more and spend more, and then say that's going to make the problem better.
And I'm afraid that's what I think I'm hearing from Governor Clinton.
I believe what you need to do is some of what Ross is talking about: control the growth of mandatory spending and get taxes down.
He's mentioned some ways to do it--and I agree with those.
I've been talking about getting a capital gains cut forever, and his friends in Congress have been telling me that's a tax break for the rich.
It would stimulate investment.
I'm for an investment tax allowance; I'm for a tax break for first- time homebuyers.
And with this new Congress coming in, gridlock will be gone, and I'll sit down with them and say let's get this done.
But I do not want to go the tax-and-spend route.
 I assume she was supportive of the decision on McDonnell Douglas, I assume she was supporting me on the decision to sell those airplanes.
I think it's a good decision--took a little heat for it, but I think it was the correct decision to do.
And we worked it out, and indeed we're moving forward all around the world in a much more peaceful way.
So that one we came away with in creating jobs for the American people.
I would simply say to her, look, take a look at what the president has proposed on job retraining.
When you cut back on defense spending, some people are going to be thrown out of work.
If you throw another 50,000 kids on the street because of cutting recklessly in troop levels, you're going to put a lot more out of work.
I would say to them, look at the job retraining programs that we're proposing.
Therein is the best answer to her.
And another one is: stimulate investment and savings.
I mean, we've got big economic problems, but we are not coming apart at the seams; we're ready for a recovery.
With interest rates down and inflation down, the cruelest tax of all, caught up in a global slowdown right now, that that will change if you go with the programs I've talked about and if you help with job retraining and education.
I am a firm believer that our America 2000 education problem is the answer--a little longer run; it's going to take awhile to educate.
But it is a good program.
So her best help for short term is job retraining, if she was thrown out of work at a defense plant.
But tell her it's not all that gloomy; we're the US, we faced tough problems before.
Look at the misery index when the Democrats had both the White House and the Congress.
It was just right through the roof.
Now, we can do better.
And the way to do better is not to tax and spend but to retrain, get that control of the mandatory spending programs.
I'm much more optimistic about this country than some.
 Defense industries are going to have to convert to civilian industries.
Many of them are.
And the sooner they start, the sooner they'll finish.
And there will be a significant transition.
And it's very important that we not continue to let our industrial base deteriorate.
We had someone who I'm sure regrets said it in the president's staff said he didn't care whether we made potato chips or computer chips.
Well, anybody that thinks about it cares a great deal.
Number one, you make more making computer chips than potato chips; and, number 2, 19 out of 20 computer chips that we have in this country now come from Japan.
We've given away whole industries.
So as we phase these industries over, there's a whole of intellectual talent in these industries.
A lot of these people in industries can be converted to the industries of tomorrow, and that's where the high-paying jobs are.
We need to have a very carefully thought through phase-over.
Now, see, we practice 19th century capitalism.
The rest of the world practices 21st century capitalism.
I can't handle that in a minute, but I hope we can get back into it later.
In the rest of the world, the countries and the businesses would be working together to make this transition in an intelligent way.
 We must have a transition plan to plan to convert from a defense to a domestic economy.
No other nation would have cut defense as much as we already have without that.
There are 200,000 people unemployed in California alone because we have cut defense without planning to retrain them and to reinvest in the technologies of the future here at home.
That is what I want to do.
This administration may say they have a plan, but the truth is they have not even released all the money, the paltry sum of money, that Congress appropriated.
I want to take very dollar by which we reduce defense and reinvest it in technologies for the 21st century--in new transportation, in communication, in environmental clean-up technologies.
Let's put the American people to work, and let's build the kind of high-tech, high-wage, high-growth economy that the American people deserve.
 Step one, the American people send me up there, the day after election, I'll get with congressional--we won't even wait till inauguration, and I'll ask the president to help me and I'll ask his staff to help me.
And we will start putting together teams to put together--to take all the plans that exist and do something with them.
Please understand.
There are great plans lying all over Washington nobody ever executes.
It's like having a blueprint for a house you never built.
You don't have anywhere to sleep.
Now our challenge is to take these things, do something with them.
Step one, we want to put America back to work, clean up the small business problem, have one task force at work on that.
The second, you've got your big companies that are in trouble, including the defense industries--have another one on that.
Have a 3rd task force on new industries of the future to make sure we nail those for our country and they don't wind up in Europe and Asia.
Convert from 19th to 21st century capitalism.
See, we have an adversarial relationship between government and business.
Our international competitors that are cleaning our plate have an intelligent relationship between government and business, and a supportive relationship.
Then have another task force on crime because, next to jobs, our people are concerned about their safety.
Health care, schools--one on the debt and deficit.
And finally in that 90- day period before the inauguration, put together the framework for the town hall and give the American people a Christmas present.
Show them by Christmas the first cut at these plans.
By the time Congress comes into session to go to work, have those plans ready to go in front of Congress.
Then get off to a flying start in '93 to execute these plans.
Now, there are people in this room and people on this stage who've been in meetings when I would sit there and say, "Is this the one we're going to talk about or do something about?"
Well, obviously, my orientation is let's go do it.
Now, put together your plans by Christmas, be ready to go when Congress goes, nail these things.
Small business--you've got to have capital, you've got to credit, and many of them need mentors or coaches.
And we can create more jobs there in a hurry than any other place.
 This country desperately needs a jobs program, and my first priority would be to pass a jobs program, to introduce it on the first day I was inaugurated.
I would meet with the leaders of the Congress, with all the newly elected members of the Congress and as many others with whom I could meet between the time of the election and the inauguration, and we would present a jobs program.
Then we would present a plan to control health care costs and phase in health care coverage for all Americans.
Until we control health care costs, we're not going to control the deficit.
It is the number one culprit.
But first we must have an aggressive jobs program.
I live in a state where manufacturing job growth has far outpaced the nation in the last few years, where we have created more private sector jobs since Mr. Bush has been president than have been created in the entire rest of the country, where Mr. Bush's labor secretary said job growth has been enormous.
We've done it in Arkansas.
Give me a chance to create these kind of jobs in America.
We can do it.
I know we can.
 We've got the plan announced for what we can do for small business.
I've already put forward things that'll get this country working fast, some of which have been echoed here tonight--investment tax allowance, capital gains reduction, more on research and development, tax credit for first-time home buyers.
What I'm going to do is say to Jim Baker when this campaign is over, all right, let's sit down now, you do in domestic affairs what you've done in foreign affairs, be kind of the economic coordinator of all the domestic side of the House, and that includes all the economic side, all the training side, and bring this program together.
We're going to have a new Congress, and we're going to say to them, you've listened to the voters the way we have.
Nobody wants gridlock anymore, and so let's get the program through.
And I believe it'll work because, as Ross said, we got the plans.
The plans are all over Washington.
And I've put ours together in something called the Agenda for American Renewal, and it makes sense, it's sensible, it creates jobs, it gets to the base of the kind of jobs we need.
And so I'll just be asking for support to get that put into effect.
 Well, let me say that I think that we might ought to review the terms, the way it works.
But frankly, I don't think that's the problem today.
We have low interest rates today.
At least we have low interest rates that the Fed can control.
Our long-term interest rates are still pretty high because of our deficit and because of our economic performance.
And there was a terrible reaction internationally to Mr. Bush saying he was going to give us 4 more years of trickle-down economics--another across-the- board tax cut and most of it going to the wealthy, with no real guarantee of investment.
But I think the important thing--the important thing-- is to use the powers the president does have on the assumption that, given the condition of this economy, we're going to keep interest rates down if we have the discipline to increase investment and reduce the debt at the same time.
That is my commitment.
I think the American people are ready for action.
I think Congress is hungry for someone who will work with them instead of manipulate them.
Someone who will not veto a bill that has an investment tax credit, middle class tax relief, research and development tax credits as Mr. Bush has done.
Give me a chance to do that.
I don't have to worry in the near term about the Federal Reserve.
Their policies so far, it seems to me, are pretty sound.
 I don't think the Fed ought to be put under the Executive Branch.
There is a separation there.
I think that's fine.
Alan Greenspan is respected.
I've had some arguments with him about the speed in which we might have lowered interest rates, but Governor Clinton, he talks about the reaction to the markets.
There was a momentary fear that he might win and that the markets went phwee, down like that.
So I don't think we can judge on, the stock market has been strong.
It's been very strong since I've been president.
And they recognize we got great difficulties, but they're also much more optimistic than the pessimists we have up here tonight.
In terms of vetoing tax bills, you're darn right.
I am going to protect the American taxpayer against the spend and tax Congress.
And I'm going to keep on vetoing them, because I don't think we're taxed too little.
I think the government's spending too much.
So Governor Clinton can label it tax for the rich or anything he wants.
I'm going to protect the working man by continuing to veto, and to threaten to veto until we get this new Congress, and then we're going to move forward on our plan.
Ive got to protect them.
 Keep the Federal Reserve independent, but let's live in a world of reality.
We live in a global economy, not a national economy.
These interest rates we have now don't make any sense.
We have a four trillion dollar debt, and only in America would you finance seventy percent of it five years or less.
So seventy percent of our debt is five years or less.
It's very interest sensitive.
We have a four percent gap between what we pay for treasuries, and what Germany pays for one to five year treasuries.
That gap is going to close, because the Arabs, the Japanese and folks in this country are going to start buying German treasuries because they can get more money.
Every time our interest rates go up one percent, that adds 28 billion dollars to the deficit or to the debt.
Whichever place you put it.
We are sitting on a ticking time bomb folks, because we have totally mismanaged our country, and we had better get it back under control.
Just think in your own business, if you had all of your long term problems financed short term.
You'd go broke in a hurry.
 Again, if you're not rich, you're not a superpower.
So we have two that I'd put as number one.
I have number 1 and 1A.
One is we've got to have the money to be able to pay for defense, and we've got to manufacture here.
Believe it or not folks, you can't ship it all overseas, you've got to make it here.
And you can't convert from potato chips to airplanes in an emergency.
See, Willow Run could be converted from cars to airplanes in World War II because it was here.
We've got to make things here.
You can't ship them overseas anymore.
I hope we can talk more about that.
Second thing, on priorities.
We've got to help Russia succeed in its revolution and all of its republics.
When we think of Russia, remember we're thinking of many countries, now.
We've got to help them.
That's pennies on the dollar compared to renewing the cold war.
Third, we've got all kinds of agreements on paper, and some that are being executed on getting rid of nuclear warheads.
Russia and its republics are out of control or at best in weak control right now.
It's a very unstable situation.
You've got every rich Middle Eastern country over there trying to buy nuclear weapons.
As you well know.
And that will lead to another five star migraine headache down the road.
We really need to nail down the big intercontinental ballistic missiles, the ones that can hit us from Russia.
And we've focused on the tactical.
We've made real progress there.
We've got some agreement on the nuclear, but we don't have those things put away yet.
The sooner the better.
So, in terms of priorities, we've got to be financially strong.
Number two, we've got to take care of this missile situation and try to get the nuclear war behind us and give this thing very high priority.
And number three, we need to help and support Russia and the republics in every possible way to become democratic capitalistic societies, and not just sit back and let those countries continue in turmoil.
Because they could go back worse than things used to be.
And believe me there are a lot of old boys in the K.G.B.
and the military that liked it better the way it used to be.
 In order to keep America the strongest nation in the world, we need some continuity and some change.
There are three fundamental challenges.
First of all, the world is still a dangerous and uncertain place.
We need a new military and a new national security policy equal to the challenges of a post cold war era, a smaller permanent military force, but one that is more mobile, well trained with high technology equipment.
We need to continue the negotiations to reduce the nuclear arsenals in the Soviet Union, the former Soviet Union, and the United States.
We need to stop this proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Second, we have to face that in this world, economic security is a whole lot of national security.
Our dollar's at an all time low against some foreign currencies.
We're weak in the world.
We must rebuild America's strength at home.
And finally, we ought to be promoting the democratic impulses around the world.
Democracies are our partners.
They don't go to war with each other.
They're reliable friends in the future.
National security, economic strength, democracy.
 Well, we still are the envy of the world in terms of our military.
There's no question about that.
We're the envy of the world in terms of our economy, despite the difficulties we're having.
There's no question about that.
Our exports are dramatically up.
I might say to Mr. Perot, I can understand why you might have missed it, because there's so much fascination with trivia, but I worked out a deal with Boris Yeltsin to eliminate, get rid of entirely, the most destabilizing weapons of all, the SS-18, the intercontinental ballistic missile.
I mean, that's been done.
And thank God, it has, because the parents of these young people around here go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war.
We made dramatic progress.
And so, we've got a good military.
the question, to sort of get a new military, get the best in the world, we got it, and theyre keeping the peace, and they're respected around the world.
And we're more respected because of the way we have conducted ourselves.
We didn't listen to the nuclear freeze crowd.
We said, "Peace through strength," and it worked and the cold war is over.
And America understands that.
But we're so, turned so inward we don't understand the global picture.
And we are helping democracy, Ross.
The Freedom Support Act is something I got through the Congress, and it's a very good thing, because it does exactly what you say, and I think you agree with that, to help Russian democracy.
And we're going to keep on doing that.
 I think our relationships with China are important and I don't want to isolate China, but I think it is a mistake for us to do what this Administration did when all those kids went out there carrying the Statue of Liberty in Tiananmen Square.
Mr Bush sent two people in secret to toast the Chinese leaders and basically tell them not to worry about it.
They rewarded him by opening negotiations with Iran to transfer nuclear technology.
That was their response to that sort of action.
Now that the voices in the Congress and throughout the country have insisted that we do something about China, look at what has happened.
China has finally agreed to stop sending us products made with prison labor.
Not because we coddled them, but because the Administration was pushed into doing something about it.
And recently the Chinese have announced they are going to lower some barriers to our products, which they ought to do since they have a 15 billion dollar trade surplus with the United States under Mr. Bush.
The second biggest surplus next to Japan.
So I would be firm.
I would say if you want to continue as Most Favored Nation status for your government owned industries as well as your private ones, observe human rights in the future.
Open your society.
Recognize the legitimacy of those kids that were carrying the Statue of Liberty.
If we can stand up for our economics, we ought to be able to preserve the democratic interests of the people of China.
And over the long run they will be more reliable partners.
 Well, the Administration was the first major country to stand up to the abuse in Tiananmen Square.
We are the one that worked out the prison labor deal.
We are the ones that lowered the barrier to products with Carla Hill's negotiation.
I am the one that said let's keep the M.F.N.
because you see China moving towards a free market economy.
To do what the Congress and Governor Clinton is suggesting, you'd isolate and ruin Hong Kong.
They are making some progress, not enough for us.
We were the first ones to put sanctions on.
We still have them on, on some things.
But Governor Clinton's philosophy is isolate them.
He says don't do it, but the policies he's expounding of putting conditions on M.F.N.
and kind of humiliating them is not the way you make the kind of progress we are getting.
And I've stood up with these people, and I understand what you have to do to be strong in this situation, and it's moving, not as fast as we'd like.
But you isolate China and turn them inward, and then we've made a tremendous mistake.
And I'm not going to do it.
And I've had to fight a lot of people that were saying human rights, and were the ones that put the sanctions on and stood for it.
And he can insult General Scowcroft if he wants to.
They didn't go over to coddle.
He went over to say we must make the very changes they're making now.
 All right, it's huge.
China, is a huge country, broken into many provinces.
It has some very elderly leaders that will not be around too much longer.
Capitalism is growing and thriving across big portions of China.
Asia will be our largest trading partner in the future.
It will be a growing and a closer relationship.
We have a delicate, tight-wire walk that we must go through at the present time to make sure that we do not cozy up to tyrants, to make sure that they don't get the impression that they can suppress their people.
But time is our friend there, because their leaders will change in not too many years, worst case, and their country is making great progress.
One last point on the missiles.
I don't want the American people to be confused.
We have written agreements and we have some missiles that have been destroyed, but we have a huge number of intercontinental ballistic missiles that are still in place in Russia.
The fact that you have an agreement is one thing.
Till they're destroyed, some crazy person can either sell them or use them.
 Ann, both of them are very complicated situations.
And I vowed something because I learned something from Vietnam.
I am not going to commit US forces until I know what the mission is, till the military tell me that it can be completed, and till I know how they can come out.
We are helping.
American airplanes are helping today on humanitarian relief for Sarajevo.
It is America that's in the lead in helping with humanitarian relief for Somalia.
But when you go to put somebody else's son or daughter into war, I think you got to be a little bit careful and you have to be sure that there's a military plan that can do this.
You have ancient ethnic rivalries that have cropped up as Yugoslavia's dissolved or getting dissolved, and it isn't going to be solved by sending in the 82nd Airborne, and I'm not going to do that as commander-in-chief.
I am going to stand by and use the moral persuasion of the US to get satisfaction in terms of prison camps, and we're making some progress there, and in terms of getting humanitarian relief in there.
And right now, as you know, the US took the lead in a no-fly operation up there in-- no- fly order up in the United Nations.
We're working through the international organizations.
That's one thing I learned by forging that tremendous and greatly--highly successful coalition against Saddam Hussein, the dictator.
Use--work internationally to do it.
I am very concerned about it.
I am concerned about ethnic cleansing.
I am concerned about a tax on Muslims, for example, over there.
But I must stop short of using American force until I know how those young men and women are going to get out of there as well as get in, know what the mission is, and define it.
And I think I'm on the right track.
 I think if we learned anything in Vietnam is you first commit this nation before you commit the troops to the battlefield.
We cannot send our people all over the world to solve every problem that comes up.
This is basically a problem that is a primary concern to the European Community.
Certainly we care about the people, we care about the children, we care about the tragedy.
But it is inappropriate for us, just because there's a problem somewhere around the world, to take the sons and daughters of working people--and make no mistake about it, our all- volunteer armed force is not made up of the sons and daughters of the beautiful people; it's the working folks who send their sons and daughters to war, with a few exceptions.
It's very unlike World War II, when FDR's sons flew missions.
Everybody went.
It's a different world now.
It's very important that we not just, without thinking it through, just rush to every problem in the world and have our people torn to pieces.
 I agree that we cannot commit ground forces to become involved in the quagmire of Bosnia or in the tribal wars of Somalia.
But I think that it's important to recognize that there are things that can be done short of that, and that we do have interests there.
There are, after all, 2 million refugees now because of the problems in what was Yugoslavia, the largest number since World War II, and there may be hundreds of thousands of people who will starve or freeze to death in this winter.
The US should try to work with its allies and stop it.
I urged the president to support this air cover, and he did--and I applaud that.
I applaud the no-fly zone, and I know that he's going back to the United Nations to try to get authority to enforce it.
I think we should stiffen the embargo on the Belgrade government, and I think we have to consider whether or not we should lift the arms embargo now on the Bosnians, since they are in no way in a fair fight with a heavily armed opponent bent on ethnic cleansing.
We can't get involved in the quagmire, but we must do what we can.
 I think the principal that separates me is that 5 and a half million people came together on their own and put me on the ballot.
I was not put on the ballot by either of the 2 parties; I was not put on the ballot by any PAC money, by any foreign lobbyist money, by any special interest money.
This is a movement that came from the people.
This is the way the framers of the Constitution intended our government to be, a government that comes from the people.
Over time we have developed a government that comes at the people, that comes from the top down, where the people are more or less treated as objects to be programmed during the campaign with commercials and media events and fear messages and personal attacks and things of that nature.
The thing that separates my candidacy and makes it unique is that this came from millions of people in 50 states all over this country who wanted a candidate that worked and belonged to nobody but them.
I go into this race as their servant, and I belong to them.
So this comes from the people.
 The most important distinction in this campaign is that I represent real hope for change, a departure from trickle-down economics, a departure from tax and spend economics, to invest in growth.
But before I can do that, I must challenge the American people to change, and they must decide.
Tonight I say to the President: Mr. Bush, for 12 years you've had it your way.
You've had your chance and it didn't work.
It's time to change.
I want to bring that change to the American people.
But we must all decide first we have the courage to change for hope and a better tomorrow.
 Well, I think one thing that distinguishes is experience.
I think we've dramatically changed the world.
I'll talk about that a little bit later, but the changes are mind-boggling for world peace.
Kids go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war.
And change for change sake isn't enough.
We saw that message in the late 70s when heard a lot about change, and what happened, that misery index went right through the roof.
But my economic program is the kind of change we want.
And the way we're going to get it done is we're going to have a brand new Congress.
A lot of them are thrown out because of all the scandals.
I'll sit down with them, Democrats and Republicans alike, and work for my agenda for American renewal, which represents real change.
But I'd say, if you had to separate out, I think it's experience at this level.
 I believe experience counts, but it's not everything.
Values, judgment, and the record that I have amassed in my state also should count for something.
I've worked hard to create good jobs and to educate people.
My state now ranks first in the country in job growth this year, fourth in income growth, fourth in reduction of poverty, third in overall economic performance, according to a major news magazine.
That's because we believe in investing in education and in jobs.
And we have to change in this country.
You know, my wife, Hillary, gave me a book about a year ago in which the author defined insanity as just doing the same old thing over and over again and expecting a different result.
We have got to have the courage to change.
Experience is important, yes.
I've gotten a lot of good experience in dealing with ordinary people over the last year and month.
I've touched more people's lives and seen more heartbreak and hope, more pain and more promise, than anybody else who's run for president this year.
I think the American people deserve better than they're getting.
We have gone from first to thirteenth in wages in the world in the last twelve years, since Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan have been in.
Personal income has dropped while people have worked harder.
In the last four years, there have been twice as many bankruptcies as new jobs created.
We need a new approach.
The same old experience is not relevant.
We're living in a new world after the Cold War, and what works in this new world is not trickle down, not government for the benefit of the privileged few, not tax and spend, but a commitment to invest in American jobs and American education, controlling American health care costs, and bringing the American people together.
That is what works.
And you can have the right kind of experience and the wrong kind of experience.
Mine is rooted in the real lives of real people, and it will bring real results if we have the courage to change.
 I just thought of another -- another big difference here between me.
I don't believe Mr. Perot feels this way, but I know Governor Clinton did because I want to accurately quote him.
He thinks, I think he said, that the country is coming apart at the seams.
Now, I know that the only way he can win is to make everybody believe the economy's worse than it is.
But this country is not coming apart at the seams, for heaven's sakes.
We're the United States of America.
In spite of the economic problems, we're the most respected economy around the world.
Many would trade for it.
We've been caught up in a global slowdown.
We can do much, much better, but we ought not try to convince the American people that America is a country that's coming apart at the seams.
I would hate to be running for president and think that the only way I could win would be to convince everybody how horrible things are.
Yes, there are big problems, and yes, people are hurting.
But I believe that this Agenda for American renewal I have is the answer to do it, and I believe we can get it done now, whereas we didn't in the past, because you're going to have a whole brand new bunch of people in the Congress that are going to have to listen to the same American people I'm listening to.
 Well, they've got a point.
I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt.
(Laughter.)
I don't have any experience in gridlock government where nobody takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else.
I don't have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the industrialized world, the most violent crime-ridden society in the industrialized world.
 But I do have a lot of experience in getting things done.
So, if we're at a point in history where we want to stop talking about it and do it, I've got a lot of experience in figuring out how to solve problems, making the solutions work, and then moving on to the next one.
I've got a lot of experience in not taking 10 years to solve a 10-minute problem.
So, if it's time for action, I think I have experience that counts.
If there's more time for gridlock and talk and finger pointing, I'm the wrong man.
 I think the American people should be the judge of that.
I think character is a very important question.
I said something the other day where I was accused of being like Joe McCarthy because I questioned -- I put it this way; I think it's wrong to demonstrate against your own country or organize demonstrations against your own country in foreign soil.
I just think it's wrong.
I -- well, maybe they say, "Well, it was a youthful indiscretion."
I was 19 or 20 flying off an aircraft carrier and that shaped me to be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.
And I'm sorry, but demonstrating -- it's not a question of patriotism.
It's a question of character and judgment.
They get on me -- Bill's gotten on me about, "read my lips."
When I make a mistake I'll admit it.
But he has made -- not admitted a mistake and I just find it impossible to understand how an American can demonstrate against his own country in a foreign land -- organizing demonstrations against it when young men are held prisoner in Hanoi or kids out of the ghetto were drafted.
Some say, "well, you're a little old fashioned."
Maybe I am, but I just don't think that's right.
Now, whether it's character or judgment -- whatever it is -- I have a big difference here on this issue and so we'll just have to see how it plays out.
But I -- I couldn't do that.
And I don't think most Americans could do that.
And they all say, "Well, it was a long time ago."
Well, let's admit it then.
Say, "I made a terrible mistake."
How could you be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and have some kid say -- when you have to make a tough decision, as I did in Panama or Kuwait and then have some kid jump up and say, "Well, I'm not going to go.
The Commander-in-Chief was organizing demonstrations halfway around the world during another era.
So there are differences but that's about the main area where I think we have a difference.
I don't know about -- we'll talk about that a little with Ross here in a bit.
 I think the American people will make their own decisions on character and at a time when we have work to do and we need action I think they need to clearly understand the backgrounds of each person.
I think the press can play a huge roll in making sure that the backgrounds are clearly presented in an objective way.
Then, make a decision.
Certainly anyone in the White House should have the character to be there.
But, I think it's very important to measure when and where things occurred.
Did they occur when you were a young person, in your formative years?
Or did they occur while you were a senior official in the federal government?
When youre a senior official in the federal government spending billions of dollars in taxpayers money and youre a mature individual and you make a mistake, then that was on our ticket.
If you make it as a young man, time passes.
So I would say just, you know, look at all three of us.
Decide who you think will do the job.
Pick that person in November because believe me, as I've said before, "The party's over and it's time for the clean-up crew."
And we do have to have change and people who never take responsibility for anything when it happens on their watch and people who are in charge --
 The time is up.
(Laughter).
 More later.
 Ross gave a good answer but I've got to respond directly to Mr. Bush.
You have questioned my patriotism.
 (Inaudible).
 You even brought some right-wing congressman into the White House to plot how to attack me for going to Russia in 1969-70, when over 50,000 other Americans did.
Now, I honor your service in World War II, I honor Mr. Perot's service in uniform and the service of every man and woman who ever served, including Admiral Crowe, who was your Chairman of the joint Chiefs and who's supporting me.
But when Joe McCarthy went around this country attacking people's patriotism he was wrong.
He was wrong.
And a senator from Connecticut stood up to him named Prescott Bush.
Your father was right to stand up to Joe McCarthy, you were wrong to attack my patriotism.
I was opposed to the war but I loved my country and we need a president who will bring this country together, not divide it.
We've had enough division.
I want to lead a unified country.
 The tax increase I have proposed triggers in at family incomes of $200,000 and above.
Those are the people who in the 1980s had their incomes go up while their taxes went down.
Middle-class people, defined as people with incomes of $52,000 and down, had their incomes go down while their taxes went up in the Reagan-Bush years because of 6 increases in the payroll taxes.
So that is where my income limit would trigger.
 Right.
My plan -
 --notwithstanding my opponent's ad, my plan triggers in at gross incomes, family incomes of $200,000 and above.
Then we want to give modest middle-class tax relief to restore some fairness, especially to middle- class people with families with incomes of under $60,000.
In addition to that, the money that I raise from upper-income people and from asking foreign corporations just to pay the same income on their income earned in America that American corporations do will be used to give incentives back to upper-income people.
I want to give people permanent incentives on investment tax credit, like President Kennedy and the Congress inaugurated in the early '60s to get industry moving again; a research and development tax credit; a low-income housing tax credit; a long-term capital gains proposal for new business and business expansions.
We've got to have no more trickle down.
We don't need across-the-board tax cuts for the wealthy for nothing.
We need to say here's your tax incentive: if you create American jobs, the old-fashioned way.
I'd like to create more millionaires than were created under Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan, but I don't want to have 4 years where we have no growth in the private sector, and that's what's happened in the last 4 years.
We're down 35,000 jobs in the private sector.
We need to invest and grow, and that's what I want to do.
 Well, let me--I have to correct one thing.
I didn't question the man's patriotism.
I questioned his judgment and his character.
What he did in Moscow, that's fine.
Let him explain it.
He did.
I accept that.
What I don't accept is demonstrating and organizing demonstrations in a foreign country when your country's at war.
I'm sorry.
I cannot accept that.
In terms of this one on taxes spells out the biggest difference between us.
I do not believe we need to go back to the Mondale proposals or the Dukakis proposals of tax and spend.
Governor Clinton says $200,000 but he also says he wants to raise $150 billion.
Taxing people over $200,000 will not get you $150 billion.
And then when you add in his other spending proposals, regrettably you end up socking it to the working man.
That old adage they use--we're going to soak the rich- -we're going to soak the rich--it always ends up being the poor cab driver or the working man that ends up paying the bill.
And so I just have a different approach.
I believe the way to get the deficit down is to control the growth of mandatory spending programs, and not raise taxes on the American people.
We've got a big difference there.
 We've got to have a growing, expanding job base to give us a growing, expanding tax base.
Right now we have a flat to deteriorating job base and where it appears to be growing, it's minimum-wage jobs.
So we've got to really rebuild our job base.
That's going to take money for infrastructure and investment to do that.
Our foreign competitors are doing it; we're not.
We cannot pay off the $4 trillion debt, balance the budget and have the industries of the future and the high- paying jobs in this country without having the revenue.
We're going to go through a period of shared sacrifice.
There's one challenge.
It's got to be fair.
We've created a mess, don't have much to show for it and we have got to fix it.
And that's about all I can say in a minute.
 Well, Sander, that's a good question, and the answer is: for 40-some years we kept the peace.
If you look at the cost of not keeping the peace in Europe, it would be exorbitant.
We have reduced the number of troops that are deployed and going to be deployed.
I have cut defense spending.
And the reason we could do that is because of our fantastic success in winning the Cold War.
We never would have got there if we had gone for the nuclear freeze crowd; we never would have got there if we had listened to those that wanted to cut defense spending.
I think it is important that the US stay in Europe and continue to guarantee the peace.
We simply cannot pull back.
Now, when anybody has a spending program they want to spend money on at home, they say, well, let's cut money out of the Defense Dept.
I will accept and have accepted the recommendations of 2 proven leaders, General Colin Powell and Secretary Dick Cheney.
They feel that the levels we're operating at and the reductions that I have proposed are proper.
And so I simply do not think we should go back to the isolation days and starting blaming foreigners.
We are the sole remaining superpower, and we should be that.
And we have a certain disproportionate responsibility.
But I would ask the American people to understand that if we make imprudent cuts, if we go too far, we risk the peace.
And I don't want to do that.
I've seen what it is like to see a war, to see the burdens of a war, and I don't want to see us make reckless cuts.
Because of our programs we have been able to significantly cut defense spending.
But let's not cut into the muscle, and let's not cut down our insurance policy, which is participation of American forces in NATO, the greatest peace- keeping organization ever made.
Today you've got problems in Europe, still bubbling along even though Europe's gone democracy's route.
But we are there, and I think this insurance policy is necessary.
I think it goes with world leadership, and I think the levels we've come up with are just about right.
 If I'm poor and you're rich, and I can get you to defend me, that's good.
But when the tables get turned, I ought to do my share.
Right now we spend about $300 billion a year on defense, the Japanese spend around 30 billion in Asia, the Germans spend around 30 billion in Europe.
For example, Germany will spend a trillion dollars building infrastructure over the next 10 years.
It's kind of easy to do if you only have to pick up a $30-billion tab to defend your country.
The European Community is in a position to pay a lot more than they have in the past.
I agree with the president: when they couldn't, we should have; now that they can, they should.
We sort of seem to have a desire to try to stay over there and control it.
They don't want us to control it, very candidly.
So it I think is very important for us to let them assume more and more of the burden and for us to bring that money back here and rebuild our infrastructure, because we can only be a superpower if we are an economic superpower; and we can only be an economic superpower if we have a growing, expanding job base.
 I agree with the general statement Mr. Bush made.
I disagree that we need 150,000 troops to fulfill our role in Europe.
We certainly must maintain an engagement there.
There are certainly dangers there, there are certainly other trouble spots in the world which are closer to Europe than to the US.
But 2 former defense secretaries recently issued a report saying that 100,000 or slightly fewer troops would be enough, including President Reagan's former defense secretary, Mr. Carlucci.
Many of the military experts whom I consulted on this agreed.
We're going to have to spend more money in the future on military technology and on greater mobility, greater airlift, greater sealift, the B-22 airplane.
We're going to have to do some things that are quite costly.
And I simply don't believe we can afford nor do we need to keep 150,000 troops in Europe given how much the Red Army, now under the control of Russia, has been cut, the arms control agreement concluded between Mr. Bush and Mr. Yeltsin, something I have applauded.
I don't think we need 150,000 troops.
Let me make one other point.
Mr. Bush talked about taxes.
He didn't tell you that he vetoed a middle class tax cut because it would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy and vetoed an investment tax credit paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy.
 It's 10 cents a year cumulative.
It finally gets to 50 cents at the end of the 5th year.
I think "punish" is the wrong word.
Again, see, I didn't create this problem.
We're trying to solve it.
Now, if you study our international competitors, some of our international competitors collect up to $3.50 a gallon in taxes, and they use that money to build infrastructure and to create jobs.
We collect 35 cents, and we don't have it to spend.
I know it's not popular, and I understand the nature of your question.
But the people who will be helped the most by it are the working people who will get the jobs created because of this tax.
Why do we have to do it?
Because we have so mismanaged our country over the years, and it is now time to pay the fiddler.
And if we don't, we will be spending our children's money.
We have spent $4 trillion worth.
An incredible number of young people are active in supporting my effort because they are deeply concerned that we have taken the American dream from them.
I think it's fitting that we're on the campus of a university tonight.
These young people, when they get out of this wonderful university, will have difficulty finding a job.
We've got to clean this mess up, leave this country in good shape, and pass on the American dream to them.
We've got to collect the taxes to do it.
If there's a fairer way, I'm all ears (laughter) --aah.
(Laughter and applause) But--but--see, let me make it very clear.
If people don't have the stomach to fix these problems, I think it's a good time to face it, November.
If they do, then they will have heard the harsh reality of what we have to do.
I'm not playing Lawrence Welk music tonight.
 I think Mr. Perot has confronted this deficit issue, but I think it's important to point out that we really have 2 deficits in America, not one.
We have a budget deficit in the federal government, but we also have an investment, a jobs, an income deficit.
People are working harder for less money than they were making 10 years ago, 2- 3rds of our people--a $1600 drop in average income in just the last 2 years.
The problem I have with the Perot prescription is that almost all economists who've looked at it say that if you cut the deficit this much this quick it will increase unemployment, it will slow down the economy.
That's why I think we shouldn't do it that quickly.
We have a disciplined reduction in the deficit of 50 % over the next 4 years, but first get incentives to invest in this economy, put the American people back to work.
We've got to invest and grow.
9 Nobel Prize-winning economists and 500 others, including numerous Republican and Democratic business executives, have endorsed this approach because it offers the best hope to put America back to work and get our incomes rising instead of falling.
 Your question was on fairness.
I just disagree with Mr. Perot.
I don't believe it is fair to slap a 50-cent-a-gallon tax over whatever many years on the people that have to drive for a living, people that go long distances.
I don't think we need to do it.
You see, I have a fundamental difference.
I agree with what he's talking about in trying to get this spending down and the discipline, although I think we ought to totally exempt Social Security.
But he's talking tough medicine, and I think that's good.
I disagree with the tax-and-spend philosophy.
You see, I don't think we need to tax more and spend more, and then say that's going to make the problem better.
And I'm afraid that's what I think I'm hearing from Governor Clinton.
I believe what you need to do is some of what Ross is talking about: control the growth of mandatory spending and get taxes down.
He's mentioned some ways to do it--and I agree with those.
I've been talking about getting a capital gains cut forever, and his friends in Congress have been telling me that's a tax break for the rich.
It would stimulate investment.
I'm for an investment tax allowance; I'm for a tax break for first- time homebuyers.
And with this new Congress coming in, gridlock will be gone, and I'll sit down with them and say let's get this done.
But I do not want to go the tax-and-spend route.
 I assume she was supportive of the decision on McDonnell Douglas, I assume she was supporting me on the decision to sell those airplanes.
I think it's a good decision--took a little heat for it, but I think it was the correct decision to do.
And we worked it out, and indeed we're moving forward all around the world in a much more peaceful way.
So that one we came away with in creating jobs for the American people.
I would simply say to her, look, take a look at what the president has proposed on job retraining.
When you cut back on defense spending, some people are going to be thrown out of work.
If you throw another 50,000 kids on the street because of cutting recklessly in troop levels, you're going to put a lot more out of work.
I would say to them, look at the job retraining programs that we're proposing.
Therein is the best answer to her.
And another one is: stimulate investment and savings.
I mean, we've got big economic problems, but we are not coming apart at the seams; we're ready for a recovery.
With interest rates down and inflation down, the cruelest tax of all, caught up in a global slowdown right now, that that will change if you go with the programs I've talked about and if you help with job retraining and education.
I am a firm believer that our America 2000 education problem is the answer--a little longer run; it's going to take awhile to educate.
But it is a good program.
So her best help for short term is job retraining, if she was thrown out of work at a defense plant.
But tell her it's not all that gloomy; we're the US, we faced tough problems before.
Look at the misery index when the Democrats had both the White House and the Congress.
It was just right through the roof.
Now, we can do better.
And the way to do better is not to tax and spend but to retrain, get that control of the mandatory spending programs.
I'm much more optimistic about this country than some.
 Defense industries are going to have to convert to civilian industries.
Many of them are.
And the sooner they start, the sooner they'll finish.
And there will be a significant transition.
And it's very important that we not continue to let our industrial base deteriorate.
We had someone who I'm sure regrets said it in the president's staff said he didn't care whether we made potato chips or computer chips.
Well, anybody that thinks about it cares a great deal.
Number one, you make more making computer chips than potato chips; and, number 2, 19 out of 20 computer chips that we have in this country now come from Japan.
We've given away whole industries.
So as we phase these industries over, there's a whole of intellectual talent in these industries.
A lot of these people in industries can be converted to the industries of tomorrow, and that's where the high-paying jobs are.
We need to have a very carefully thought through phase-over.
Now, see, we practice 19th century capitalism.
The rest of the world practices 21st century capitalism.
I can't handle that in a minute, but I hope we can get back into it later.
In the rest of the world, the countries and the businesses would be working together to make this transition in an intelligent way.
 We must have a transition plan to plan to convert from a defense to a domestic economy.
No other nation would have cut defense as much as we already have without that.
There are 200,000 people unemployed in California alone because we have cut defense without planning to retrain them and to reinvest in the technologies of the future here at home.
That is what I want to do.
This administration may say they have a plan, but the truth is they have not even released all the money, the paltry sum of money, that Congress appropriated.
I want to take very dollar by which we reduce defense and reinvest it in technologies for the 21st century--in new transportation, in communication, in environmental clean-up technologies.
Let's put the American people to work, and let's build the kind of high-tech, high-wage, high-growth economy that the American people deserve.
 Step one, the American people send me up there, the day after election, I'll get with congressional--we won't even wait till inauguration, and I'll ask the president to help me and I'll ask his staff to help me.
And we will start putting together teams to put together--to take all the plans that exist and do something with them.
Please understand.
There are great plans lying all over Washington nobody ever executes.
It's like having a blueprint for a house you never built.
You don't have anywhere to sleep.
Now our challenge is to take these things, do something with them.
Step one, we want to put America back to work, clean up the small business problem, have one task force at work on that.
The second, you've got your big companies that are in trouble, including the defense industries--have another one on that.
Have a 3rd task force on new industries of the future to make sure we nail those for our country and they don't wind up in Europe and Asia.
Convert from 19th to 21st century capitalism.
See, we have an adversarial relationship between government and business.
Our international competitors that are cleaning our plate have an intelligent relationship between government and business, and a supportive relationship.
Then have another task force on crime because, next to jobs, our people are concerned about their safety.
Health care, schools--one on the debt and deficit.
And finally in that 90- day period before the inauguration, put together the framework for the town hall and give the American people a Christmas present.
Show them by Christmas the first cut at these plans.
By the time Congress comes into session to go to work, have those plans ready to go in front of Congress.
Then get off to a flying start in '93 to execute these plans.
Now, there are people in this room and people on this stage who've been in meetings when I would sit there and say, "Is this the one we're going to talk about or do something about?"
Well, obviously, my orientation is let's go do it.
Now, put together your plans by Christmas, be ready to go when Congress goes, nail these things.
Small business--you've got to have capital, you've got to credit, and many of them need mentors or coaches.
And we can create more jobs there in a hurry than any other place.
 This country desperately needs a jobs program, and my first priority would be to pass a jobs program, to introduce it on the first day I was inaugurated.
I would meet with the leaders of the Congress, with all the newly elected members of the Congress and as many others with whom I could meet between the time of the election and the inauguration, and we would present a jobs program.
Then we would present a plan to control health care costs and phase in health care coverage for all Americans.
Until we control health care costs, we're not going to control the deficit.
It is the number one culprit.
But first we must have an aggressive jobs program.
I live in a state where manufacturing job growth has far outpaced the nation in the last few years, where we have created more private sector jobs since Mr. Bush has been president than have been created in the entire rest of the country, where Mr. Bush's labor secretary said job growth has been enormous.
We've done it in Arkansas.
Give me a chance to create these kind of jobs in America.
We can do it.
I know we can.
 We've got the plan announced for what we can do for small business.
I've already put forward things that'll get this country working fast, some of which have been echoed here tonight--investment tax allowance, capital gains reduction, more on research and development, tax credit for first-time home buyers.
What I'm going to do is say to Jim Baker when this campaign is over, all right, let's sit down now, you do in domestic affairs what you've done in foreign affairs, be kind of the economic coordinator of all the domestic side of the House, and that includes all the economic side, all the training side, and bring this program together.
We're going to have a new Congress, and we're going to say to them, you've listened to the voters the way we have.
Nobody wants gridlock anymore, and so let's get the program through.
And I believe it'll work because, as Ross said, we got the plans.
The plans are all over Washington.
And I've put ours together in something called the Agenda for American Renewal, and it makes sense, it's sensible, it creates jobs, it gets to the base of the kind of jobs we need.
And so I'll just be asking for support to get that put into effect.
 Well, let me say that I think that we might ought to review the terms, the way it works.
But frankly, I don't think that's the problem today.
We have low interest rates today.
At least we have low interest rates that the Fed can control.
Our long-term interest rates are still pretty high because of our deficit and because of our economic performance.
And there was a terrible reaction internationally to Mr. Bush saying he was going to give us 4 more years of trickle-down economics--another across-the- board tax cut and most of it going to the wealthy, with no real guarantee of investment.
But I think the important thing--the important thing-- is to use the powers the president does have on the assumption that, given the condition of this economy, we're going to keep interest rates down if we have the discipline to increase investment and reduce the debt at the same time.
That is my commitment.
I think the American people are ready for action.
I think Congress is hungry for someone who will work with them instead of manipulate them.
Someone who will not veto a bill that has an investment tax credit, middle class tax relief, research and development tax credits as Mr. Bush has done.
Give me a chance to do that.
I don't have to worry in the near term about the Federal Reserve.
Their policies so far, it seems to me, are pretty sound.
 I don't think the Fed ought to be put under the Executive Branch.
There is a separation there.
I think that's fine.
Alan Greenspan is respected.
I've had some arguments with him about the speed in which we might have lowered interest rates, but Governor Clinton, he talks about the reaction to the markets.
There was a momentary fear that he might win and that the markets went phwee, down like that.
So I don't think we can judge on, the stock market has been strong.
It's been very strong since I've been president.
And they recognize we got great difficulties, but they're also much more optimistic than the pessimists we have up here tonight.
In terms of vetoing tax bills, you're darn right.
I am going to protect the American taxpayer against the spend and tax Congress.
And I'm going to keep on vetoing them, because I don't think we're taxed too little.
I think the government's spending too much.
So Governor Clinton can label it tax for the rich or anything he wants.
I'm going to protect the working man by continuing to veto, and to threaten to veto until we get this new Congress, and then we're going to move forward on our plan.
Ive got to protect them.
 Keep the Federal Reserve independent, but let's live in a world of reality.
We live in a global economy, not a national economy.
These interest rates we have now don't make any sense.
We have a four trillion dollar debt, and only in America would you finance seventy percent of it five years or less.
So seventy percent of our debt is five years or less.
It's very interest sensitive.
We have a four percent gap between what we pay for treasuries, and what Germany pays for one to five year treasuries.
That gap is going to close, because the Arabs, the Japanese and folks in this country are going to start buying German treasuries because they can get more money.
Every time our interest rates go up one percent, that adds 28 billion dollars to the deficit or to the debt.
Whichever place you put it.
We are sitting on a ticking time bomb folks, because we have totally mismanaged our country, and we had better get it back under control.
Just think in your own business, if you had all of your long term problems financed short term.
You'd go broke in a hurry.
 Again, if you're not rich, you're not a superpower.
So we have two that I'd put as number one.
I have number 1 and 1A.
One is we've got to have the money to be able to pay for defense, and we've got to manufacture here.
Believe it or not folks, you can't ship it all overseas, you've got to make it here.
And you can't convert from potato chips to airplanes in an emergency.
See, Willow Run could be converted from cars to airplanes in World War II because it was here.
We've got to make things here.
You can't ship them overseas anymore.
I hope we can talk more about that.
Second thing, on priorities.
We've got to help Russia succeed in its revolution and all of its republics.
When we think of Russia, remember we're thinking of many countries, now.
We've got to help them.
That's pennies on the dollar compared to renewing the cold war.
Third, we've got all kinds of agreements on paper, and some that are being executed on getting rid of nuclear warheads.
Russia and its republics are out of control or at best in weak control right now.
It's a very unstable situation.
You've got every rich Middle Eastern country over there trying to buy nuclear weapons.
As you well know.
And that will lead to another five star migraine headache down the road.
We really need to nail down the big intercontinental ballistic missiles, the ones that can hit us from Russia.
And we've focused on the tactical.
We've made real progress there.
We've got some agreement on the nuclear, but we don't have those things put away yet.
The sooner the better.
So, in terms of priorities, we've got to be financially strong.
Number two, we've got to take care of this missile situation and try to get the nuclear war behind us and give this thing very high priority.
And number three, we need to help and support Russia and the republics in every possible way to become democratic capitalistic societies, and not just sit back and let those countries continue in turmoil.
Because they could go back worse than things used to be.
And believe me there are a lot of old boys in the K.G.B.
and the military that liked it better the way it used to be.
 In order to keep America the strongest nation in the world, we need some continuity and some change.
There are three fundamental challenges.
First of all, the world is still a dangerous and uncertain place.
We need a new military and a new national security policy equal to the challenges of a post cold war era, a smaller permanent military force, but one that is more mobile, well trained with high technology equipment.
We need to continue the negotiations to reduce the nuclear arsenals in the Soviet Union, the former Soviet Union, and the United States.
We need to stop this proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Second, we have to face that in this world, economic security is a whole lot of national security.
Our dollar's at an all time low against some foreign currencies.
We're weak in the world.
We must rebuild America's strength at home.
And finally, we ought to be promoting the democratic impulses around the world.
Democracies are our partners.
They don't go to war with each other.
They're reliable friends in the future.
National security, economic strength, democracy.
 Well, we still are the envy of the world in terms of our military.
There's no question about that.
We're the envy of the world in terms of our economy, despite the difficulties we're having.
There's no question about that.
Our exports are dramatically up.
I might say to Mr. Perot, I can understand why you might have missed it, because there's so much fascination with trivia, but I worked out a deal with Boris Yeltsin to eliminate, get rid of entirely, the most destabilizing weapons of all, the SS-18, the intercontinental ballistic missile.
I mean, that's been done.
And thank God, it has, because the parents of these young people around here go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war.
We made dramatic progress.
And so, we've got a good military.
the question, to sort of get a new military, get the best in the world, we got it, and theyre keeping the peace, and they're respected around the world.
And we're more respected because of the way we have conducted ourselves.
We didn't listen to the nuclear freeze crowd.
We said, "Peace through strength," and it worked and the cold war is over.
And America understands that.
But we're so, turned so inward we don't understand the global picture.
And we are helping democracy, Ross.
The Freedom Support Act is something I got through the Congress, and it's a very good thing, because it does exactly what you say, and I think you agree with that, to help Russian democracy.
And we're going to keep on doing that.
 I think our relationships with China are important and I don't want to isolate China, but I think it is a mistake for us to do what this Administration did when all those kids went out there carrying the Statue of Liberty in Tiananmen Square.
Mr Bush sent two people in secret to toast the Chinese leaders and basically tell them not to worry about it.
They rewarded him by opening negotiations with Iran to transfer nuclear technology.
That was their response to that sort of action.
Now that the voices in the Congress and throughout the country have insisted that we do something about China, look at what has happened.
China has finally agreed to stop sending us products made with prison labor.
Not because we coddled them, but because the Administration was pushed into doing something about it.
And recently the Chinese have announced they are going to lower some barriers to our products, which they ought to do since they have a 15 billion dollar trade surplus with the United States under Mr. Bush.
The second biggest surplus next to Japan.
So I would be firm.
I would say if you want to continue as Most Favored Nation status for your government owned industries as well as your private ones, observe human rights in the future.
Open your society.
Recognize the legitimacy of those kids that were carrying the Statue of Liberty.
If we can stand up for our economics, we ought to be able to preserve the democratic interests of the people of China.
And over the long run they will be more reliable partners.
 Well, the Administration was the first major country to stand up to the abuse in Tiananmen Square.
We are the one that worked out the prison labor deal.
We are the ones that lowered the barrier to products with Carla Hill's negotiation.
I am the one that said let's keep the M.F.N.
because you see China moving towards a free market economy.
To do what the Congress and Governor Clinton is suggesting, you'd isolate and ruin Hong Kong.
They are making some progress, not enough for us.
We were the first ones to put sanctions on.
We still have them on, on some things.
But Governor Clinton's philosophy is isolate them.
He says don't do it, but the policies he's expounding of putting conditions on M.F.N.
and kind of humiliating them is not the way you make the kind of progress we are getting.
And I've stood up with these people, and I understand what you have to do to be strong in this situation, and it's moving, not as fast as we'd like.
But you isolate China and turn them inward, and then we've made a tremendous mistake.
And I'm not going to do it.
And I've had to fight a lot of people that were saying human rights, and were the ones that put the sanctions on and stood for it.
And he can insult General Scowcroft if he wants to.
They didn't go over to coddle.
He went over to say we must make the very changes they're making now.
 All right, it's huge.
China, is a huge country, broken into many provinces.
It has some very elderly leaders that will not be around too much longer.
Capitalism is growing and thriving across big portions of China.
Asia will be our largest trading partner in the future.
It will be a growing and a closer relationship.
We have a delicate, tight-wire walk that we must go through at the present time to make sure that we do not cozy up to tyrants, to make sure that they don't get the impression that they can suppress their people.
But time is our friend there, because their leaders will change in not too many years, worst case, and their country is making great progress.
One last point on the missiles.
I don't want the American people to be confused.
We have written agreements and we have some missiles that have been destroyed, but we have a huge number of intercontinental ballistic missiles that are still in place in Russia.
The fact that you have an agreement is one thing.
Till they're destroyed, some crazy person can either sell them or use them.
 Ann, both of them are very complicated situations.
And I vowed something because I learned something from Vietnam.
I am not going to commit US forces until I know what the mission is, till the military tell me that it can be completed, and till I know how they can come out.
We are helping.
American airplanes are helping today on humanitarian relief for Sarajevo.
It is America that's in the lead in helping with humanitarian relief for Somalia.
But when you go to put somebody else's son or daughter into war, I think you got to be a little bit careful and you have to be sure that there's a military plan that can do this.
You have ancient ethnic rivalries that have cropped up as Yugoslavia's dissolved or getting dissolved, and it isn't going to be solved by sending in the 82nd Airborne, and I'm not going to do that as commander-in-chief.
I am going to stand by and use the moral persuasion of the US to get satisfaction in terms of prison camps, and we're making some progress there, and in terms of getting humanitarian relief in there.
And right now, as you know, the US took the lead in a no-fly operation up there in-- no- fly order up in the United Nations.
We're working through the international organizations.
That's one thing I learned by forging that tremendous and greatly--highly successful coalition against Saddam Hussein, the dictator.
Use--work internationally to do it.
I am very concerned about it.
I am concerned about ethnic cleansing.
I am concerned about a tax on Muslims, for example, over there.
But I must stop short of using American force until I know how those young men and women are going to get out of there as well as get in, know what the mission is, and define it.
And I think I'm on the right track.
 I think if we learned anything in Vietnam is you first commit this nation before you commit the troops to the battlefield.
We cannot send our people all over the world to solve every problem that comes up.
This is basically a problem that is a primary concern to the European Community.
Certainly we care about the people, we care about the children, we care about the tragedy.
But it is inappropriate for us, just because there's a problem somewhere around the world, to take the sons and daughters of working people--and make no mistake about it, our all- volunteer armed force is not made up of the sons and daughters of the beautiful people; it's the working folks who send their sons and daughters to war, with a few exceptions.
It's very unlike World War II, when FDR's sons flew missions.
Everybody went.
It's a different world now.
It's very important that we not just, without thinking it through, just rush to every problem in the world and have our people torn to pieces.
 I agree that we cannot commit ground forces to become involved in the quagmire of Bosnia or in the tribal wars of Somalia.
But I think that it's important to recognize that there are things that can be done short of that, and that we do have interests there.
There are, after all, 2 million refugees now because of the problems in what was Yugoslavia, the largest number since World War II, and there may be hundreds of thousands of people who will starve or freeze to death in this winter.
The US should try to work with its allies and stop it.
I urged the president to support this air cover, and he did--and I applaud that.
I applaud the no-fly zone, and I know that he's going back to the United Nations to try to get authority to enforce it.
I think we should stiffen the embargo on the Belgrade government, and I think we have to consider whether or not we should lift the arms embargo now on the Bosnians, since they are in no way in a fair fight with a heavily armed opponent bent on ethnic cleansing.
We can't get involved in the quagmire, but we must do what we can.
 Thank you, Jim.
And thank you to the people of Hartford, our hosts.
 Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President, for those kind words.
Thank the people of Hartford, the Commission, and all those out here who may be listening or watching.
 Well, Jim, I believe that the Federal government should give people the tools and try to establish the conditions in which they can make the most of their own lives.
That, to me, is the key.
And that leads me to some different conclusions from Senator Dole.
 I think the basic difference is, and I have had some experience in this, I think the basic difference, I trust the people.
The President trusts the government.
We go back and look at the healthcare plan that he wanted to impose on the American people.
One seventh the total economy, 17 new taxes, price controls, 35 to 50 new bureaucracies that cost $1.5 trillion.
Don't forget that, that happened in 1993.
A tax increase, a tax on everybody in America.
Not just the rich.
If you made 25,000 as the original proposal, you got your Social Security taxes increased.
We had a BTU tax we turned into a $35 million gas tax, a $265 billion tax increase.
 I trust the people.
We've done a lot to give the people more powers to make their own decisions over their own lives.
But I do think we are right when we try to, for example, give mothers and newborns 48 hours before they can be kicked out of the hospital, ending these drive-by deliveries.
 Well, he's better off than he was four years ago.
 I agree with that.
That's right.
 And I may be better off four years from now, but I don't know.
I looked at the slowest growth in the century.
He inherited a growth of 4.7 4.8 percent, now it's down to about 2.4 percent.
We're going to pass a million bankruptcies this year for the first time in history.
We've got stagnant wages.
In fact, women's wages have dropped 2.2 percent.
Men's wages haven't gone up, gone down.
So we have stagnation.
 Well, let me say, first of all, in February Senator Dole acknowledged that the American economy was in the best shape it's been in in 30 years.
We have ten and a half million more jobs, a faster job growth rate than under any Republican administration since the 1920s.
Wages are goings up for the first time in a decade.
We have record numbers of new small businesses.
We have the biggest drop in the number of people in poverty in 27 years.
All groups of people are growing.
We had the biggest drop in income inequality in 27 years in 1995.
 I doubt that I acknowledged that this year.
But in any event, I think we just look at the facts.
We ask the people that are viewing tonight, are you better off than you were four years ago.
It's not whether we're better off, it's whether they're better off.
 Absolutely not.
Let's look at the position.
First of all, remember that in this campaign season, since Senator Dole's been a candidate, he has bragged about the fact that he voted against Medicare in the beginning, in 1965, one of only 12 members.
He said he did the right thing then, he knew it wouldn't work at the time.
That's what he said.
 Well, I must say, I look back at the vote on Medicare in 1965, we had a program called Eldercare that also provided drugs and means tests to people who needed medical attention received it.
I thought it was a good program.
But I've supported Medicare ever since.
 Well, let me say, first of all, I'd be happy to have a commission deal with this and I appreciate what Senator Dole did on the '83 Social Security commission.
But it won't be possible to do, if his tax scheme passes because even his own campaign co-chair, Senator D'Amato, says he'll have to cut Medicare even more than was cut in the bill that I vetoed.
I vetoed that bill because it cut more Medicare and and basically ran the risk of breaking up the system.
My balanced budget plan puts ten years on the Medicare.
We ought to do that, then we can have a commission.
But Senator Dole's plans are not good for the country.
 Oh, yes.
And you'll be eligible.
 Me too?
 And so will the former President, yes.
 I need it.
 Well, the people need it, that's the point.
This is not a Wall Street tax cut.
This is a family tax cut.
This is a Main Street tax cut, 15 percent across -- let's take a family making $30,000 a year, that's $1261.
Now, maybe to some in this Bushnell Memorial that it's not a lot of money, but people watching tonight with a couple of kids, a working family, that's four or five months of day care, maybe a personal computer; it's may be three or four months of mortgage payments.
This economic package is about families but it's a six-point package.
First of all, it's a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution which President Clinton defeated.
He twisted arms and got six Democrats to vote the other way, but we lost by one vote.
It's balancing a budget by the year 2002.
It's a tax cut, cutting capital gains 50 percent.
So you can go out and create more jobs and more opportunities.
It's a state tax relief.
It's a $500 per child tax credit.
It's about litigation reforms.
 Well, here's the problem with it: It sounds very good, but there's a reason that 500 economists, including seven Nobel prize winners and business periodicals like Business Week, and even Senator Dole's friends, Senator Warren Rudman, former Republican senator from New Hampshire, says it's not a practical program.
It's a $550 billion tax scheme that will cause a big hole in the deficit which will raise interest rates and slow down the economy and cause people to pay more for home mortgages, car payments, credit card payments, college loans, and small business loans.
It's not good to raise the deficit.
We worked too hard to lower it.
It will actually raise taxes on nine million people and, in addition to that, it will force bigger cuts in Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment than the ones that he and Mr. Gingrich passed that I vetoed last year.
So it sounds great, but our targeted tax cut for education, child rearing, healthcare and home buying, which is paid for in my balanced budget plan, something that he has not done, certified by the Congressional budget office, that's the right way to go.
 The President wants to increase spending 20 percent over the next six years.
I want to increase spending 14 percent, that's how simple it is.
I want the government to pinch pennies for a change instead of the American families.
We're talking about six percentage points over six years, and with that money you give it back to the working people.
You also provide opportunity scholarships so low income parents will have the same choice that others have in sending their children to better schools.
It will work, and when it does work, Mr. President, I know you'll congratulate me.
 Well, I try to articulate my positions as clearly as possible, tell people what I stand for and let them decide whether they're going to support me or not.
 How does he avoid conflict?
Well, I don't know in the case of the trial lawyers.
I look at the trial lawyers, and when you're a few million short, you run out to Hollywood and pick up two to four million and organized labor comes to Washington, D.C. and puts 35 million into the pot.
Now, if these aren't special interests, I've got a lot to learn.
I was there for a while before I left on June the 11th.
The trial lawyers and I don't -- you know, my wife's a lawyer.
We're the only two lawyers in Washington that trust each other.
But we're lawyers, I like lawyers.
I don't dislike trial lawyers.
But it seemed to me there's got to be some end to the frivolous lawsuits and there's got to be some cap on punitive damage.
You're putting a lot of business people out of business.
Small businessmen and businesswomen who paid 70 percent of your ninteen , your$265 billion tax increase, the largest tax increase in the history of America.
I said that one day and Pat Moynihan, a Democrat, say, no, he said, in the history of the world.
So I modified it, the largest tax increase in the history of the world.
And it seems to me that there is a problem there, Mr. President.
And I will address you as Mr. President.
You didn't do that with Mr. with President Bush in 1992.
 Let me say, first of all, I signed a tort reform bill that dealt with civilian aviation a couple of years ago.
I proved that I will sign reasonable tort reform.
Secondly, Senator Dole had some pretty harsh comments about special interest money, but it wasn't me who opposed what we tried to do to save the lives of children who were subject to tobacco and then went to the tobacco growers and bragged about standing up for the Federal government when we tried to stop the advertising, marketing, and sales of tobacco to children.
And it wasn't me that let the polluters actually come into the halls of Congress, into the rooms, and rewrite the environmental laws.
That's what Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole did, not me.
 That's not true.
 So I believe that we should take a different approach to this and talk about how we stand on the issues instead of trying to characterize each other's motivations.
I think Senator Dole and I just honestly disagree.
 I think it's very difficult.
Let's be honest about it.
That's why we need campaign finance reform.
That's why I reach out to the Perot voters.
We've done about all, we are the reform party, the Republican Party.
And the Perot voters that are looking for a home ought to take a look at the Republican record.
Whatever it is, whatever the checklist was in '92, it's all done with campaign finance reform.
I worked with Senator Mitchell, who played me, I guess, in the debate warmup.
We tried six or eight years ago.
He appointed three people, I appointed three people to get campaign finance reform.
We couldn't get it done, because I wasn't enforceable.
 Mr. Lehrer, I hope we'll have a chance to discuss drugs later in the program.
But let me respond to what you said.
I agree that too many incumbent politicians in Washington in both parties have consistently opposed campaign finance reform.
That was certainly the case from the minute I got there.
So after Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole took over the Congress, I went to New Hampshire and a man suggested -- a gentleman that unfortunately just passed away a couple of days ago, suggested that we appoint a commission.
And I shook hands with him on it and I appointed my members, and the commission never met.
And then Senator Dole's ardent supporters, Senator McCain, who's out there today, along with Senator Feingold, supported, sponsored a campaign finance reform proposal.
I strongly supported it.
And members of Senator Dole's own party in the Senate killed it.
And he was not out there urging them to vote for the McCain-Feingold bill.
So I think the American people, including the Perot supporters, know that I have had a consistent record in favor of campaign finance reform, and I will continue to have.
And I hope we can finally get it in the next session of Congress, because we need it badly.
 Well, on campaign reform itself, we're going to get it when we have a bipartisan commission, take it out of politics.
Get people who don't have any interest in politics but understand the issue and let them make the recommendation to Congress.
Now, we're now kidding anybody, Mr. President.
These are sophisticated people watching tonight.
Millions and millions of Americans.
They know the Republican Party hasn't done it.
They know the Democratic party won't do it.
We ought to agree that somebody else should do it.
And we have to vote it up or down, Mr. President.
 Well, Jim, I think every American in any position of responsibility should be concerned about what's happened.
I am.
But let's look at the overall record.
Overall in America cocaine use has dropped 30 percent in the last four years, casual drug use down 13 percent.
The tragedy is that our young people are still increasing their use of drugs up to about 11 percent total with marijuana, and I regret it.
Let me tell you what I tried to do about it.
I appointed a four-star general who led our efforts south of the border to keep drugs from coming into the country as our nation's drug czar.
The most heavily directed, decorated solder in uniform when he retired.
We submitted the biggest drug budget ever.
We have dramatically increased control and enforcement at the border.
We supported a a crime bill that had 60 death penalties including, including the death penalty for drug kingpins.
And I supported a big expansion in safe and drug-free schools program to support things like the DARE program because I thought all those things were very important.
Do I think that I bear some responsibility for the fact that too many of our children still don't understand drugs are wrong, drugs can kill you.
Even though I have consistently opposed the legalization of drugs all my public life and worked hard against them.
I think we all do.
And I hope we can do better.
I don't think this issue should be politicized because my record is clear and I don't think Senator Dole supports using using drugs.
I think we just have to continue to work on this until those who think it isn't dangerous and won't kill them and won't destroy their lives, get the message and change.
 Again, well it's, you are very selective, Mr. President.
You don't want to politicize drugs, but it's already politicized Medicare, go out and scare senior citizens and other vulnerable groups, veterans and people who get Pell Grants and things like this.
I mean, you say we've done all these bad things, which isn't the case.
But it seems to me the record is clear.
The record is pretty clear in Arkansas, when you were governor.
Drug use doubled.
You resisted the appointment of a drug czar there because you thought it might interfere with treatment.
But here you cut the drug czar's office 83 percent.
You cut interdiction substantially.
I mean that's what, I want to stop it from coming across the border.
And in my administration, we're going to train the National Guard to stop it from coming across the border.
This is a invasion of drugs from all over the world.
And we have a responsibility.
You had a surgeon -- or before General McCaffrey (ph) you had a lady who said we ought to consider legalizing drugs.
Is that the kind of leadership we need?
And I won't comment on other things that happened in your administration or your past about drugs.
But it seems to me the kids ought to -- if they've started, they ought to stop and just don't do it.
 Let me say again, we did have a drug czar in Arkansas, but he answered to the governor, just like this one answers to the President.
That's what I thought we ought to do.
 Not if I didn't have a better idea.
But I've got a better idea.
It's something I've worked on for 15 years.
It's called the automated check or the instant check.
It's being used in 17 states right now.
States like Florida, Colorado, Virginia, and other states.
You don't buy any gun.
You don't get any gun.
We've got 20 million names on a computer in Washington, D.C. of people who should not have guns.
We ought to keep guns out of the hands of criminals.
And, there are eight other categories that should not have guns.
I've been working on this for a long, long time.
You walk in, you put your little card in there.
If it says tilt, you don't get any gun.
You don't get a hand gun, you don't get a rifle, you don't get a shot gun, you get zippo.
 Let me say, first of all, Senator Dole has gone back and forth about whether he'd be for repealing the Brady Bill or repealing the assault weapons ban.
And I think his present position is he would not do so, and if that's true I'm grateful for it.
But let's look at the facts here.
The Brady Bill has kept at least 60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers from getting hand guns.
Senator Dole led the fight against the Brady Bill.
He tried to keep it from coming to my desk.
He didn't succeed and I signed it and I'm glad I did.
 Well, the President doesn't have it quite right.
I mean, it seemed to me at the time the assault weapon ban was not effective.
But that's history.
I told the NRA that's history.
You're not going to worry about it anymore.
I'm not going to worry about it anymore.
Let's do something better.
Let's stop, you know, playing the political game, Mr. President.
Talking about this and this.
You add all the states that've used the instant check and how many weapons they keep, kept out of the hands of criminals.
It would far surpass the numbers you mentioned.
So in my view, if you want to be protected, you ought to vote for Bob Dole and we'll get the instant check passed and we'll keep guns out of the hands of criminals.
 If he, that's what he said, he's not right about that.
Look at where we are today.
The United States is still the indispensable nation in the aftermath of the Cold War and on the brink of the 21st Century.
I have worked to support our country as the world's strongest force for peace and freedom, prosperity and security.
 Well, I have a different view.
Again, Ive supported the President on Bosnia, and I think we were told the troops would be out in a year.
Now I understand it's been extended 'til some time next year.
But, let's start with Somalia, where they dragged Americans through the streets, and where 18 Americans were killed one day, because they didn't have, they were pinned down for eight hours, the rangers.
They didn't have the weapons, they didn't have the tanks.
They asked for the tanks.
They didn't get the tanks from this administration because we were nation building.
It's called mission creep.
We turn it over to the United Nations.
The President didn't have much to do about it.
You look at Haiti, where we spend about three billion dollars and we got an alarm call there about two weeks ago.
You got to send down some more people, because the president's found out there are death squads on his on his, in his own property.
So we need more protection from America.
Bosnia, Northern Ireland.
There's no ceasefire in Bosnia.
I think there are still lot of problems in Bosnia.
We agreed to train and arm the Muslims so they could defend themselves, the policy you had when you ran in 1992.
We haven't done that.
We're way behind, which means Americans can't come home.
Americans shouldn't have gone there in the first place, had we let them defend themselves, as they have a right to do under Article 57 of the United Nations charter.
 First of all, I take full responsibility for what happened in Somalia, but the American people must remember that those soldiers were under an American commander when that happened.
I believe they did the best they could under the circumstances, and let's not forget that hundreds of thousands of lives were saved there.
 Well it, after World War I, we had, you know, a policy of disengagement.
Then from World War I to World War II we had sort of a compulsory engagement policy.
Now I think we have a selective engagement policy.
We have to determine when our interests are involved, not the United Nations' interests.
And many of the things the President talked about, he turned over to the United Nations.
They decided.
 Our military is the strongest military in the world.
It is the strongest, best prepared, best equipped it has ever been.
There is very little difference in the budget that I proposed and the Republican budget over the next six-year period.
We are spending a lot of money to modernize our weapons system.
I have proposed a lot of new investments to improve the quality of life for our soldiers, for our men and women in uniform, for their families, for their training.
That is my solemn obligation.
 Well I failed to mention North Korea and Cuba, a while ago.
You look at North Korea where they have enough plutonium to build six nuclear bombs.
We've sort of distanced ourselves from our ally, South Korea.
They lost about a million people in the war, the Korean War, the forgotten war.
We lost 53,000 Americans.
 Well, first of all, for the last four years we have worked had to put more and more pressure on the Castro government to bring about more openness and move toward democracy.
In 1992, before I became President, the Congress passed the Cuba Democracy Act and I enforced it vigorously.
We made the embargo tougher but we increased contacts people to people with the Cubans, including direct telephone service, which was largely supported by the Cuban-American community.
Then Cuba shot down two of our planes and murdered four people in international air space.
They were completely beyond the pale of the law, and I signed the Helms-Burton legislation.
Senator Dole is correct.
I did give about six months before the effective date of the act before lawsuits can actually be filed, even though they're effective now, and can be legally binding, because I want to change Cuba.
And the United States needs help from other countries.
 That's the point I made.
We have to be firm and strong.
And I hope that will happen.
It will happen starting next January and maybe it can happen the balance of this year.
We have not been firm and strong.
You look at the poor people who still live in Cuba.
It's a haven for drug smugglers and we don't have a firm policy when it comes to Fidel Castro.
In my view, the policy has failed.
 There were several off-the-subject quaffers in that litany.
Let me just mention, Senator Dole voted for $900 billion in tax increases.
His running mate Jack Kemp once said that Bob Dole never met a tax he didn't hike.
And everybody knows, including the Wall Street Journal, hardly a friend of the Democratic party of this administration, that the '82 tax increase he sponsored in inflation-adjusted dollars was the biggest tax increase in American history.
So we ought to at least get the facts out here on the table so we can know where to go from here.
 Let me first answer that question about the 1982 tax cut.
We were closing loopholes, we were going after big corporations.
I know you probably would oppose it, Mr. President, but I think we should have a fairer system and a flatter system, and we'll have a fairer and flatter system and we're going to make the economic package work.
Healthcare.
Well, we finally passed the Kassebaum bill.
The President was opposed to it in 1993.
He wanted to give us this big system, that took over about one-seventh of the economy, that put on price controls, created all these state alliances, and would cost $1.5 trillion and force people into managed care, whether they wanted it or not.
Most people want to see their own doctor.
They're going to see their own doctor when Bob Dole is president.
We won't threaten anybody.
 Well, that sounds very good, but it's very wrong.
Senator Dole remembers well that we actually offered not to even put in a healthcare bill in 1994, uh '93, but instead to work with the Senate Republicans and write a joint bill.
And they said no because they got a memo from one of their political advisers saying that instead they should characterize whatever we did as big government and make sure nothing was done to aid healthcare before the '94 elections so they could make that claim.
Well, maybe we bit off more than we could chew, but we're pursuing a step-by-step reform now.
The Kennedy-Kassebaum bill that I signed will make it possible for 25 million people to keep their health insurance when they change jobs or when somebody in their family's been sick.
I signed a bill to stop these drive-by deliveries when insurance companies can force people out of the hospital after 24 hours and I vetoed Senator Dole's Medicare plan that would have forced a lot of seniors into managed care and taken a lot more money out of their pockets and led to Medicare withering on the vine.
 Well, many of the provisions in the Kassebaum bill were provisions that -- my provisions, like deductions for long-term care, making certain that self-employed people that are watching tonight can deduct not 30 percent but 80 percent of you pay for premiums.
You can also deduct long-term care now, so it's a good it's a good start.
I think there's enough -- we're even looking at our tax cut proposal, our economic package.
There may be a way of reaching out to the uninsured, because there are a lot of uninsured people in the country, particularly children, that should be covered.
Another way you can do is to expand Medicaid.
In America no one will go without healthcare, no one will go without food.
 All right.
Food.
 Well, I believe that we did the appropriate thing under the circumstances.
Saddam Hussein is under a U.N. resolution not to threaten his neighbors or threaten his own, repress his own citizens.
Unfortunately, a lot of people, have never been as concerned about the Kurds as the United States has tried to be, and we've been flying an operation to protect them out of Turkey for many years now.
What happened was one of the Turkish, one of the Kurdish leaders invited him to go up north, but we felt since the whole world community had told him not to do it, that once he did it we had to do something.
We did not feel that I could commit.
I certainly didn't feel I should commit American troops to throw him out of where he had gone, and that was the only way to do that.
So the appropriate thing strategically to do was to reduce his ability to threaten his neighbors.
We did that by expanding what's called the no-fly zone by increasing our allies' control of the air space now from the Kuwait border to the suburbs of Baghdad.
Was it the right thing to do?
I believe it was.
Is it fully effective?
Did it make him withdraw from the north?
Well, he does , he has a little bit, and I hope he will continue.
We have learned that you give him an inch he'll take a mile.
We had to do something, and even though not all of our allies supported it at first, I think most of them now believe that what we did was an appropriate thing to do.
 Well, the president's own CIA director says Saddam is stronger now than he was.
I don't understand extending the no-fly zone in the south when the trouble was in the north.
And what we've done during the Bush administration, the Kurds were at the State Department, negotiating, trying to work their differences out.
Now we've got all thousands and thousands of refugees.
We're even shipping 3,000 Kurds to Guam.
It involves Turkey.
It's a real problem.
Saddam is probably about as strong as he ever was.
We shot, what, 44 cruise missiles, worth about a million-two a piece, and hit some radar, that repaired in a couple, three days.
Did we inflict any damage?
No.
Did we have any allies helping?
Well, we have Great Britain.
They're always very loyal to us, and I appreciate that.
And of course Kuwait.
Even though they had to find out they had 5,000 troops coming, they didn't even understand that.
We had to get their permission.
The bottom line is, we went in there alone.
We are supposed to be operating under a U.N. resolution.
We did it without any of our allies that helped in the Gulf.
 Senator Dole has two or three times before tonight criticized me for working with the U.N. Now I'm being criticized for not working with the U.N.
 It's not the U.N.
 Sometimes the United States has to act alone or at least has to act first.
Sometimes we cannot let other countries have a veto on our foreign policy.
I could not send soldiers into the north of Iraq, that would have been wrong.
It could reduce Saddam Hussein's abilities to threaten Kuwait and his other neighbors again.
That's what I did.
I still believe it was the right thing to do.
 Not mine.
 Well, there were some good pictures, but does it fall into that category?
I don't know.
I want to be very serious.
I've supported the President when I thought he was right on Bosnia.
I supported him on NAFTA and GATT.
So it's not that we always disagree.
Others disagreed with us.
 We have a very consistent policy in the Middle East: It is to support the peace process; to support the security of Israel; and to support those who are prepared to take risks for peace.
It is a very difficult environment.
The feelings are very strong.
There are extremists in all parts of the Middle East who want to kill that peace process.
Prime Minister Rabin gave his life because someone in his own country literally hated him for trying to bring peace.
I would like to have had a big, organized summit, but those people were killing each other, rapidly, innocent Arab children, innocent Israeli people, they were dying.
And there is ,so much trust has broken down in the aftermath of the change of government.
I felt that if I could just get the parties together to say let's stop the violence, start talking, commit to the negotiations, that would be a plus.
 Well, I was disappointed.
The President has not called for an unconditional end to the violence.
It seemed to me the violence stopped when these leaders came to America.
The killing and tragedies had taken place.
And it is unfortunate, it is a difficult area, no doubt about it.
It shouldn't be politicized in any way by the President or by his opponent.
And I don't intend to politicize it.
I hope they talked and I hope they've reached some result and that the killing will end.
 Thank you.
 Well, I'm saying that Senator Dole said in his fine speech in San Diego that he wanted to build a bridge to the past.
And I think I know what he meant by that.
He's troubled, as I am, by some of the things that go on today.
But I believe America is the greatest country in human history because we have maintained freedom and increasing prosperity by relentlessly pushing the barriers of knowledge, the barriers of the present, always moving into the future.
That's why when I became President I was determined to kind of move beyond this whole stale debate that had gone on in Washington for too long to get this country moving again.
And that's why we've got a country with ten and a half million more jobs, and record numbers of new businesses, and rising incomes, and falling crime rates, and welfare roll rates.
That's why we're moving in the right direction.
And I'm trying to emphasize that what I want to do is to continue to do that.
That's why my balanced budget plan will still invest and grow this economy.
That's why I want a tax cut for education and child rearing, but it's got to be paid for.
That's why I want to continue the work we have done over partisan opposition, to work with communities to bring that crime rate down until our streets are all safe again.
These are my commitments.
I am very oriented toward the future.
I think this election has to be geared toward the future.
I think America's best days are still ahead, but we've got to build the right bridge.
 You know, the President reminds me sometimes of my brother Kenny, who is no longer alive.
But Kenny was a great talker.
And he used to tell me things that I knew were not quite accurate.
So we always had a rule, we divided by six.
Maybe in your case maybe just two.
But 11 million new jobs and everything, I mean the President can't take credit for everything that governors are doing, whether that's happening in New York City when it comes to the murder rate and then not be responsible for the bad things that happen, whether it's drug use or something else in America.
So it seems to me that we can talk about what we call Kenny, the great exaggerator.
He just liked to make it sound exager, a little better, made him feel better.
 I do not for a moment think I'm entitled to all the credit for all the good things that have happened in America.
But where I have moved to work with the American people to help them have the tools to make the most of their own lives, I think I should get some credit for that.
 Yes.
I didn't favor it when it was in, started.
I voted against it.
It was a tribute after President Carter's election to the National Education Association who send a lot of delegates to the Democratic convention, who gives 99.5 percent of their money, Democrat Democrats, and the President, and a lot of the teachers send their kids to private schools or better public schools.
So what we want to do is called opportunity scholarships.
Now, some say, oh, you're a Republican, you can't be reaching out to these people.
I've reached out to people all my life.
I've worked on the food stamp program, proudly.
And the WIC program, and the school lunch program with senators like George McGovern, Hubert Humphrey and others, to name a few of my Democratic friends.
 Let me say first of all, I'm all for students having more choices.
We've worked hard to expand public school choice in my balanced budget bill.
There's funds for 3,000 new schools created by teachers and parents, sometimes by business people, called charter schools that have no rules, they're free of bureaucracy and can only stay in existence if they perform and teach children.
The ones that are out there are doing well.
 I'd better correct the President.
I don't know what time it is, but it's probably getting late.
I want to correct, the all these things I voted against, they were probably part of some big package that had a lot of pork in it or a lot of things that we shouldn't have had and we probably voted no.
I've supported all the education programs.
I've supported Headstart, I think we ought to look at it.
So I don't want anybody out there to think we've just been voting no, no, no.
Let's give low income parents the same right that people of power and prestige have in America and let them go to better schools.
Let's not, let's help, let's turn the schools back to the teachers and back to the parents and take it away from the National Education Association.
 I support school choice.
I support school choice.
I have advocated expansions of public school choice alternatives and I said the creation of 3,000 new schools that we are going to help the states to finance.
But if you're going to have a private voucher plan, that ought to be determined by states in localities where they're raising and spending most of the money.
 Well, the AmeriCorps program, I must say, if that's one of your successes, I wouldn't speak about it too loudly.
It costs about $27,000 to pay people to volunteer.
We've got four million young people volunteering every year, the number hasn't gone down.
And you pick out 20,000, whether they need the money or not, and they get paid for volunteering.
I like young people.
I like teachers.
I'm a product of a public school.
You attended a private school for some time in your life.
I like teachers.
You're not for school choice, you can't be for school choice, because this is that special interest money again.
When you get 99.5 percent of the money, we don't know what happened to the other .5 percent, we're looking for it, somebody got it, but it all went to Democrats.
And this is part of that liberal establishment, one of those liberal things that you just can't do.
You're for school uniforms and curfews and you're opposed to truancy.
Now that's not reform, Mr. President.
Why can't Landale Shakespeare in Cleveland or Pilar Gonzales in Milwaukee give their children an opportunity to go to a better school.
Some schools aren't safe.
Some schools aren't even safe.
Your choice is nothing.
Let's give them a real choice, the kind of choice you had, and the kind of choice a lot of people have in America.
If we want to stop crime and teenage pregnancy, let's start with education.
 First of all, Senator Dole, let's set the record straight.
I was able for two years when I was in, a very young boy to go to a Catholic school, but I basically went to public schools all my life.
And I've worked hard for a long time to make them better, 90 percent of our kids are there.
You, it's amazing to me, you are all for having more responsibility at the local level for everything except schools.
Where we don't have very much money at the Federal level to spend on education, we ought to spend it helping the 90 percent of the kids that we can help.
If a local school district in Cleveland or anyplace else wants to have a private choice plan like Milwaukee did, let them have at it.
I might say the results are highly ambiguous.
But I want to get out there and give a better education opportunity to all of our children and that's why I vetoed the budget you passed with $30 billion in education cuts.
It was wrong, and my plan for the future is better.
 I had precisely in mind a lot of the people that were in the White House and other agencies who've never been had any experience, who came to Washington without any experience, they all were very liberal, of course, or they wouldn't be in the administration.
And their idea was that they knew what was best for the American people.
 When Senator Dole made that remark about all the elitists, all the young elitists in the administration, one of the young men who works for me who grew up in a house trailer looked at me and said, Mr. President, I know how you grew up, who is he talking about.
And you know this liberal charge, that's what their party always drags out when they get in a tight race.
It's sort of their golden oldie, you know.
It's a record they think they can play that everybody loves to hear.
And I just don't think that dog will hunt this time.
 Well, I think it's pretty liberal, I'll put that label on it.
You take a look at all the programs you've advocated, Mr. President.
Thank goodness we had a Republican Congress there.
The first thing you did when you came into office was set up the stimulus package, said we've got a little pork we want to scatter around America, $16 billion.
And even some in your own party couldn't buy that.
 I believe that the purpose of politics is to give people the tools to make the most of their own lives; to reinforce the values of opportunity and responsibility, and to build a sense of community so we're all working together.
I don't believe in discrimination.
I believe you can protect the environment and grow the economy.
I believe that we have to do these things with a government that's smaller and less bureaucratic, but that we have to do them nonetheless.
 Well, the President can define himself in any way he wants, but I think we have to look at the record.
Go back to the time he was, what, Texas director for George McGovern.
George McGovern is a friend of mine, so I don't mean, but he was a liberal, proud liberal.
I've just finished reading a book, I think it's called -- what is it called, what is it, The Demise of the Democratic Party by Ronald Cardash (ph) or something talking about all the liberal influences in the administration.
Whether it's organized labor or whether it's the Hollywood elite or whether some of the media elite or whether it's the labor unions or whatever.
And so I think you take a look at it.
The bottom line is this: I think the American people, thought he'd recite all these bills and all these things, they want to know what's going to happen to them.
They've all got a lot of anxieties out there.
Did anybody complain when you raised taxes?
Did anybody go out and ask the people, how are you going to pay the extra money?
That's why we want an economic package.
We want the government to pinch their pennies for a change instead of the people pinching their pennies.
That's what our message is to the people watching.
Not all this back and forth, you voted this way, you voted that way, we want a better America as we go into the next century.
 The way you get a better America is to balance the budget and protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment; to give a targeted tax cut -- and let me talk about the education tax cut -- to let people have a $10,000 deduction for the cost of college tuition in any year, any kind of college tuition; to give families a tax credit, a dollar for dollar reduction in their taxes for the cost of a typical community college so we can open that to everybody.
And then to let people save in an IRA and withdraw from it without a tax penalty for education, home buying or medical expenses, that's the right way to go into the 21st Century, balance the budget and cut taxes, not balloon with this $550 billion tax scheme.
 Let me say first, on the President's promise for another tax cut.
I mean, I've told people as I've traveled around, all of you that got the tax cut he promised last time, vote for him in '96 and not many hands go up.
So the question is, would you buy a used election promise from my opponent.
The people want economic reform.
They're having a hard time making ends meet.
You've got one parent working for the government, the other parent working for the family.
This is important business.
This is about getting the economy moving again.
This is about American jobs and opportunities.
It's about the government, as I said before, pinching its pennies for a change instead of the poor taxpayer.
When they raise your taxes nobody runs around asking people where are you going to get the extra money.
I think the government can do better.
Are there personal differences?
 Well, my blood pressure is lower, my weight, my cholesterol, but I will not make health an issue in this campaign.
So I think he's a bit taller than I am.
But I think there are personal differences.
I mean, I'm not I don't like to get into personal matters.
As far as I'm concerned, this is a campaign about issues.
It's about my vision for America and about his liberal vision for America.
And not about personal things.
You know, I think his liberal vision is a thing of the past.
I know he wants to disown it.
I wouldn't want to be a liberal either, Mr. President, but you're stuck with it because that's your record, that's your record in Arkansas: The biggest tax increase in history.
The biggest crime increase in history, the biggest drug increase in history in Arkansas.
 Well, just for the record, when I was governor we had the lowest -- second lowest tax burden of any state in the country, the highest job growth rate of any state when I ran for president and were widely recognized for a lot of other advances.
 Well, I'm really encouraged to know of your renewed friendship with Al D'Amato, and I know he appreciates it.
You didn't even have tax cuts in your budget, Mr. President, the first two years you were president.
It wasn't until we had a Republican Congress you even thought about, you talked about tax cuts.
Getting back to personal differences, I think, Jim, if you are a little more specific, but I think the President could clarify one thing tonight and that's the question of pardons.
I know you talked about it on the Jim, with Jim Lehrer on the PBS show.
And I've never discussed Whitewater, as I've told you personally.
I'm not discussing Whitewater now.
But I am discussing the power the President has to grant pardons.
And hopefully in the next segment you could lay that to rest.
 Well, first of all, you know, he made that remark about Senator D'Amato.
He's arranged for me to spend a lot more time with Senator D'Amato in the last couple years so I'm more familiar with his comments than I used to be.
Let me say what I've said already about this pardon issue.
This is an issue they've brought up.
It's under, there's been no consideration of it, no discussion of it.
I will tell you this: I will not give anyone special treatment and I will strictly adhere to the law.
And that is what every president has done, as far as I know, in the past but what every other president's has done.
This is something I take seriously and that's my position.
 But it seems to me the president shouldn't have any comment at all.
Particularly where it's someone where you've had business dealings.
I mean, you may be sending a signal.
I don't know, I'm not questioning anybody.
 You bet.
 I remember one day on the floor I said now, gentlemen, let me tax your memories, and Kennedy jumped up and said, why haven't we thought of that before.
You know, so one of your liberal friends.
 Thank you.
 No comment.
 What's the subject matter?
 See, if I say anything it's going to be misconstrued.
I don't think there is even a race between the two, it's about our vision for America.
 I'd like the American people to know that I have worked very hard to be on their side.
And to move this country forward and we're better off than we were four years ago.
But the most important thing is my plan for the 21st Century is a better plan.
A targeted tax cut, a real commitment to educational reform.
A deep commitment to making welfare reform work with incentives to the private sector to move people from welfare to work.
Now we have to create those jobs, now that we're requiring people to go do work.
 Well, I'd say the first homeless bill in the Senate was the Dole-Byrd Byrd-Dole bill, I can't remember who was in control then.
I remember working with Senator Ribicoff from Connecticut on the Hospice program.
We now have 2500 hospices.
As I said, I've worked all my life when I was in the Congress.
I left on June 11th because I wanted the American people to know that I was willing to give up something.
 Let's look at that.
When I ran for president, I said we'd cut the deficit in half in four years; we cut it by 60 percent.
I said that our economic plan would produce eight million jobs, we have ten and a half million new jobs.
We're number one in autos again, record numbers of new small businesses.
I said we'd put, pass a crime bill that would put 100,000 police on the street, ban assault weapons, and deal with the problems that ought to be dealt with with capital punishment, including capital punishment for drug kingpins, and we did that.
 Well, there he goes again, that line has been used before, I mean, exaggerating all the things that he did.
He didn't do all these things.
Let's take all these four years in a row.
He came in with a high growth rate, the 1990 budget agreement, which some, you know, didn't like, had some very tough cost controls, put a lot of pressure on Congress.
The S & L crisis was over, they're starting to sell assets, all that money was coming in.
And he cut defense an extra $60 billion, threw a lot of people out of work.
 I think a lot of people deserve credit and I've tried to give it to them.
But I believe that my plan is better than Senator Dole's ill-advised $550 billion scheme which I'll say again will blow a hole in the deficit.
Our plan will balance the budget, grow the economy, preserve the environment, and invest in education.
We have the right approach for the future and looks at the results.
It is not midnight in America, Senator.
We are better off than we were four years ago.
 Well, first, Jim, let me thank you and thank you, Senator Dole, and thank you, ladies and gentlemen, all of you listening tonight for the chance you've given us to appear.
 Thank you, Jim; thank you, Mr. President; thank everyone for watching and listening.
 Well, Jim, first of all, I would like to thank the sponsors of this debate and the people of Boston for hosting the debate.
I would like to thank Governor Bush for participating, and I would like to say I'm happy to be here with Tipper and our family.
I have actually not questioned Governor Bush's experience.
I have questioned his proposals.
And here is why.
I think this is a very important moment for our country.
We have achieved extraordinary prosperity.
And in this election, America has to make an important choice.
Will we use our prosperity to enrich not just the few, but all of our families?
I believe we have to make the right and responsible choices.
If I'm entrusted with the presidency, here are the choices that I will make.
I will balance the budget every year.
I will pay down the national debt.
I will put Medicare and Social Security in a lockbox and protect them.
And I will cut taxes for middle-class families.
I believe it's important to resist the temptation to squander our surplus.
If we make the right choices, we can have a prosperity that endures and enriches all of our people.
If I'm entrusted with the presidency, I will help parents and strengthen families because, you know, if we have prosperity that grows and grows, we still won't be successful unless we strengthen families by, for example, ensuring that children can always go to schools that are safe.
By giving parents the tools to protect their children against cultural pollution.
I will make sure that we invest in our country and our families.
And I mean investing in education, health care, the environment, and middle-class tax cuts and retirement security.
That is my agenda and that is why I think that it's not just a question of experience.
 Well, we do come from different places.
I come from West Texas.
The governor is the chief executive officer.
We know how to set agendas.
I think you'll find the difference reflected in our budgets.
I want to take one-half of the surplus and dedicate it to Social Security.
One-quarter of the surplus for important projects, and I want to send one-quarter of the surplus back to the people who pay the bills.
I want everybody who pays taxes to have their tax rates cut.
And that stands in contrast to my worthy opponent's plan, which will increase the size of government dramatically.
His plan is three times larger than President Clinton's proposed plan eight years ago.
It is a plan that will have 200 new programs -- expanded programs and creates 20,000 new bureaucrats.
It it empowers Washington.
Tonight you're going to hear that my passion and my vision is to empower Americans to be able to make decisions for themselves in their own lives.
 Yes, Jim.
I said that his tax cut plan, for example, raises the question of whether it's the right choice for the country.
And let me give you an example of what I mean.
Under Governor Bush's tax cut proposal, he would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1% than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined.
Now, I think those are the wrong priorities.
Now, under my proposal, for every dollar that I propose in spending for things like education and health care, I will put another dollar into middle class tax cuts.
And for every dollar that I spend in those two categories, I'll put $2 toward paying down the national debt.
I think it's very important to keep the debt going down and completely eliminate it.
And I also think it's very important to go to the next stage of welfare reform.
Our country has cut the welfare rolls in half.
I fought hard from my days in the Senate and as vice president to cut the welfare rolls and we've moved millions of people in America into good jobs.
But it's now time for the next stage of welfare reform, and include fathers and not only mothers.
 Let me just say that obviously tonight we're going to hear some phony numbers about what I think and what we ought to do.
People need to know that over the next ten years it is going to be $25 trillion of revenue that comes into our treasurey and we anticipate spending $21 trillion.
And my plan say why don't we pass 1.3 trillion of that back to the people who pay the bills?
Surely we can afford 5% of the $25 trillion that are coming into the treasury to the hard working people that pay the bills.
There is a difference of opinion.
My opponent thinks the government -- the surplus is the government's money.
That's not what I think.
I think it's the hard-working people of America's money and I want to share some of that money with you so you have more money to build and save and dream for your families.
It's a difference of opinion.
It's a difference between government making decisions for you and you getting more of your money to make decisions for yourself.
 Yes.
I take him for his word.
Look, I fully recognize I'm not of Washington.
I'm from Texas.
And he's got a lot of experience, but so do I.
And I've been the chief executive officer of the second biggest state in the union.
I have a proud record of working with both Republicans and Democrats, which is what our nation needs.
Somebody that can come to Washington and say let's forget all the finger pointing and get positive things done on Medicare, prescription drugs, Social Security, and so I take him for his word.
 Jim, if I could just respond.
I know that.
The governor used the phrase phony numbers, but if you look at the plan and add the numbers up, these numbers are correct.
He spends more money for tax cuts for the wealthiest 1% than all of his new spending proposals for health care, prescription drugs, education and national defense all combined.
I agree that the surplus is the American people's money, it's your money.
That's why I don't think we should give nearly half of it to the wealthiest 1%, because the other 99% have had an awful lot to do with building the surplus in our prosperity.
 I hope it's about wealthy people.
 Actually what I've said, Jim.
I've said that eight years ago they campaigned on prescription drugs for seniors.
And four years ago they campaigned on getting prescription drugs for seniors.
And now they're campaigning on getting prescription drugs for seniors.
It seems like they can't get it done.
Now, they may blame other folks, but it's time to get somebody in Washington who is going to work with both Republicans and Democrats to get some positive things done when it comes to our seniors.
And so what I've said is that there's been some missed opportunities.
They've had a chance.
They've had a chance to form consensus.
I've got a plan on Medicare, for example, that's a two-stage plan that says we'll have immediate help for seniors and what I call immediate Helping Hand, a $48 billion program.
But I also want to say to seniors, if you're happy with Medicare the way it is, fine, you can stay in the program.
But we're going to give you additional choices like they give federal employees in the federal employee health plan.
They have a variety of choices to choose, so should seniors.
And my point has been, as opposed to politicizing an issue like Medicare, in other words, holding it up as an issue, hoping somebody bites it and try to clobber them over the head with it for political purposes, this year, in the year 2000, it's time to get it done once and for all.
That's what I've been critical about the administration for.
Same with Social Security.
I think there was a good opportunity to bring Republicans and Democrats together to reform the Social Security system so seniors will never go without.
Those on Social Security today will have their promise made, but also to give younger workers the option at their choice of being able to manage some of their own money in the private sector to make sure there's a Social Security system around tomorrow.
There are a lot of young workers at our rallies we go to that when they hear I'll trust them at their option to be able to manage, under certain guidelines, some of their own money to get a better rate of return so that they'll have a retirement plan in the future, they begin to nod their heads and they want a different attitude in Washington.
 Well, Jim, under my plan all seniors will get prescription drugs under Medicare.
The governor has described Medicare as a government HMO.
It's not, and let me explain the difference.
Under the Medicare prescription drug proposal I'm making, here is how it works, you go to your own doctor.
Your doctor chooses your prescription.
No HMO or insurance company can take those choices away from you.
Then you go to your own pharmacy.
You fill the prescription and Medicare pays half the cost.
If you're in a very poor family or if you have very high costs, Medicare will pay all the costs, a $25 premium, and much better benefits than you can possibly find in the private sector.
Now here is the contrast.
95% of all seniors would get no help whatsoever under my opponent's plan for the first four or five years.
Now, one thing I don't understand, Jim, is why is it that the wealthiest 1% get their tax cuts the first year, but 95% of seniors have to wait four to five years before they get a single penny?
 I guess my answer to that is the man is running on Medi-scare.
Trying to frighten people in the voting booth.
It's just not the way I think and it's not my intentions and not my plan.
I want all seniors to have prescription drugs in Medicare.
We need to reform Medicare.
There's been opportunity to do so but this administration has failed to do it.
And so seniors will have not only a Medicare plan where the poor seniors will have prescription drugs paid for, but there will be a variety of options.
The current system today has meant a lot for a lot of seniors, and I really appreciate the intentions of the current system as I mentioned.
If you're happy with the system you can stay in it.
But there are a lot of procedures that haven't kept up in Medicare with the current times.
No prescription drug benefits, no drug therapy, no preventative medicines, no vision care.
We need to have a modern system to help seniors, and the idea of supporting a federally controlled 132,000-page document bureaucracy as being a compassionate way for seniors, and the only compassionate source of care for seniors is not my vision.
I believe we ought to give seniors more options.
I believe we ought to make the system work better.
I know this.
I know it will require a different kind of leader to go to Washington to say to both Republicans and Democrats, let's come together.
You've had your chance, Vice President, you've been there for eight years and nothing has been done.
My point is, is that my plan not only trusts seniors with options, my plan sets aside $3.4 trillion for Medicare over the next ten years.
My plan also says it requires a new approach in Washington, D.C.
It's going to require somebody who can work across the partisan divide.
 If I could respond to that.
Under my plan I will put Medicare in an iron clad lockbox and prevent the money from being used for anything other than Medicare.
The governor has declined to endorse that idea even though the Republican as well as Democratic leaders in Congress have endorsed it.
I would be interested to see if he would say this evening he'll put Medicare in a lockbox.
I don't think he will because under his plan if you work out the numbers  $100 billion comes out of Medicare just for the wealthiest 1% in the tax cut.
Now here is the difference.
Some people who say the word reform actually mean cuts.
Under the governor's plan, if you kept the same fee for service that you have now under Medicare, your premiums would go up by between 18% and 47%, and that is the study of the Congressional plan that he's modeled his proposal on by the Medicare actuaries.
Let me give you one quick example.
There is a man here tonight named George McKinney from Milwaukee.
He's 70 years old, has high blood pressure, his wife has heart trouble.
They have an income of $25,000 a year.
They can't pay for their prescription drugs and so they're some of the ones that go to Canada regularly in order to get their prescription drugs.
Under my plan, half of their costs would be paid right away.
Under Governor Bush's plan, they would get not one penny for four to five years and then they would be forced to go into an HMO or to an insurance company and ask them for coverage, but there would be no limit on the premiums or the deductibles or any of the terms and conditions.
 I cannot let this go by, the old-style Washington politics, of we're going to scare you in the voting booth.
Under my plan the man gets immediate help with prescription drugs.
It's called Immediate Helping Hand.
Instead of squabbling and finger pointing, he gets immediate help.
Let me say something.
 Can I make another point?
They get $25,000 a year income, that makes them ineligible.
 Look, this is a man who has great numbers.
He talks about numbers.
I'm beginning to think not only did he invent the Internet, but he invented the calculator.
It's fuzzy math.
It's a scaring -- he's trying to scare people in the voting booth.
Under my tax plan that he continues to criticize, I set one-third.
The federal government should take no more than a third of anybody's check.
But I also dropped the bottom rate from 15% to 10%.
Because by far the vast majority of the help goes to people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.
If you're a family of four in Massachusetts, making $50,000, you get a 50% cut in the federal income taxes you pay.
It's from $4000 to about $2000.
Now, the difference in our plans is I want that $2,000 to go to you, and the vice president would like to be spending the $2,000 on your behalf.
 It's just clear you can go to the website and look.
If you make more than $25,000 a year you don't get a penny of help under the Bush prescription drug proposal for at least four to five years, and then you're pushed into a Medicare -- into an HMO or insurance company plan, and there's no limit on the premiums or the deductibles or any of the conditions.
And the insurance companies say it won't work and they won't offer these plans.
 Correct.
 Correct.
 The difference is I want to bring it to 100% and he wants to bring it to 5%.
 That's totally false for him to stand up here and say that.
Let me make sure the seniors hear me loud and clear.
They have had their chance to get something done.
I'm going to work with Democrats and Republicans to reform the system.
All seniors will be covered, all poor seniors will have their prescription drugs paid for, and in the meantime, we'll have a plan to help poor seniors and in the meantime it could be one year or two years.
 Let me call your attention to the key word there.
He said all poor seniors.
 Wait a minute.
All seniors are covered under prescription drugs in my plan.
 In the first year?
 If we can get it done in the first year, you bet.
Yours is phased in in eight years.
 It's a two-phase plan.
For the first four years -- it takes a year to pass it and for the first four years only the poor are covered.
Middle class seniors like George McKinney and his wife are not covered for four to five years.
 Excellent question.
And here is the simple difference.
My plan has not only a short-term component, but also a long-term component.
And it focuses not only on increasing the supply, which I think we have to do, but also on working on the consumption side.
Now, in the short-term we have to free ourselves from the domination of the big oil companies that have the ability to manipulate the price from OPEC when they want to raise the price.
And in the long-term we have to give new incentives for the development of domestic resources like deep gas in the western Gulf, like stripper wells for oil, but also renewable sources of energy.
And domestic sources that are cleaner and better.
And I'm proposing a plan that will give tax credits and tax incentives for the rapid development of new kinds of cars and trucks and buses and factories and boilers and furnaces that don't have as much pollution, that don't burn as much energy, and that help us get out on the cutting edge of the new technologies that will create millions of new jobs.
Because, when we sell these new products here, we'll then be able to sell them overseas.
There is a ravenous demand for them overseas.
Now, another big difference is Governor Bush is proposing to open up some of our most precious environmental treasures, like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for the big oil companies to go in and start producing oil there.
I think that is the wrong choice.
It would only give us a few months' worth of oil and the oil wouldn't start flowing for many years into the future.
I don't think it's a fair price to pay to destroy precious parts of America's environment.
We have to bet on the future and move beyond the current technologies to have a whole new generation of more efficient, cleaner, energy technology.
 It's an issue I know a lot about.
I was a small oil person for a while in west Texas.
This is an administration that's had no plan.
And all of a sudden the results of having no plan have caught up with America.
First and foremost we have to fully fund LIHEAP which is a way to help low income folks, particularly here in the east to pay for high fuel bills.
Secondly, we need an active exploration program in America.
The only way to become less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil is to explore at home.
You bet I want to open up a small part of Alaska.
When that field is online it will produce one million barrels a day.
Today we import one million barrels from Saddam Hussein.
I would rather that a million come from our own hemisphere, our own country as opposed to Saddam Hussein.
I want to build more pipelines to move natural gas throughout this hemisphere.
I want to develop the coal resources in America.
Have clean coal technologies.
We've got abundant supplies of energy here in America and we'd better get after it, we better start exploring it or otherwise we'll be in deep trouble in the future because of our dependency upon foreign sources of crude.
 Let me clarify.
I'm for doing something both on the supply side and production side and on the consumption side.
Let me say, that I found one thing in Governor Bush's answer that we certainly agree on, and that's the low income heating assistance program.
I commend you for supporting that.
I worked to get $400 million just a couple of weeks ago.
And to establish a permanent home heating oil reserve here in the northeast.
Now, as for the proposals that I've worked for for renewables and conservation and efficiencies and new technologies.
The fact is for the last few years in the Congress, we've faced a lot of opposition to them.
They've only approved about 10% of the agenda I've helped to send up there.
I think we need to get serious about this energy crisis, both in the Congress and in the White House, and if you entrust me with the presidency, I will tackle this problem and focus on new technologies that will make us less dependent on big oil or foreign oil.
 Well I would first say he should have been tackling it for the last seven years.
Secondly the difference is we need to explore at home.
And the vice president doesn't believe in exploration in Alaska.
There's a lot of shut-in gas that we need to be moving out of Alaska by pipeline.
There's an interesting issue up in the northwest as well.
Do we remove dams that produce hydroelectric energy?
I'm against removing dams in the northwest.
I don't know where the vice president stands but that's a renewable energy source of energy.
We need to keep that in line.
I was in coal country in West Virginia yesterday.
There is an abundant supply of coal in America.
I know we can do a better job of clean coal technologies.
I'm going to ask the Congress for $2 billion to make sure we have the cleanest coal technologies in the world.
My answer to you is in the short-term we need to get after it here in America.
We need to explore our resources and we need to develop our reservoirs of domestic production.
We also need to have a hemispheric energy policy where Canada, Mexico and the United States come together.
I brought this up recently with Vincent Fox the newly elected president in Mexico, he's a man I know from Mexico.
I talked to him about how best to expedite the exploration of natural gas in Mexico and transport it up to the United States so we become less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil.
This is a major problem facing America.
The administration did not deal with it.
It's time for a new administration to deal with the energy problem.
 If I may just briefly, Jim, note.
I found a couple of other things we agree upon.
We may not find that many this evening, so I wanted to emphasize.
I strongly support new investments in clean coal technology.
I made a proposal three months ago on this.
And also domestic exploration yes, but not in the environmental treasures of our country.
We don't have to do that.
That's the wrong choice.
I know the oil companies have been itching to do that, but it is not the right thing for the future.
 No.
It's the right thing for the consumers.
Less dependency upon foreign sources of crude is good for consumers.
And we can do so in an environmentally friendly way.
 Well can I have the last word on this?
 I don't think a president can do that.
I was disappointed in the ruling because I think abortions ought to be more rare in America, and I'm worried that that pill will create more abortions and cause more people to have abortions.
This is a very important topic and it's a very sensitive topic, because a lot of good people disagree on the issue.
I think what the next president ought to do is to promote a culture of life in America.
Life of the elderly and life of those living all across the country.
Life of the unborn.
As a matter of fact, I think a noble goal for this country is that every child, born or unborn, need to be protected by law and welcomed to life.
I know we need to change a lot of minds before we get there in America.
What I do believe is that we can find good, common ground on issues of parental consent or parental notification.
I know we need to ban partial birth abortions.
This is a place where my opponent and I have strong disagreement.
I believe banning partial birth abortions would be a positive step to reducing the number of abortions in America.
This is an issue that will require a new attitude.
We've been battling over abortion for a long period of time.
Surely this nation can come together to promote the value of life.
Surely we can fight off these laws that will encourage doctors to -- to allow doctors to take the lives of our seniors.
Surely we can work together to create a cultural life so some of these youngsters who feel like they can take a neighbor's life with a gun will understand that that's not the way America is meant to be.
Surely we can find common ground to reduce the number of abortions in America.
As to the drug itself, I mentioned I was disappointed.
I hope the FDA took its time to make sure that American women will be safe who use this drug.
 Well, Jim, the FDA took 12 years, and I do support that decision.
They determined it was medically safe for the women who use that drug.
This is indeed a very important issue.
First of all on the issue of partial birth or so-called late-term abortion, I would sign a law banning that procedure, provided that doctors have the ability to save a woman's life or to act if her health is severely at risk.
That's not the main issue.
The main issue is whether or not the Roe v. Wade decision is going to be overturned.
I support a woman's right to choose.
My opponent does not.
It is important because the next president is going to appoint three and maybe even four justices of the Supreme Court.
And Governor Bush has declared to the anti-choice groups that he will appoint justices in the mold of Scalia and Clarence Thomas, who are known for being the most vigorous opponents of a woman's right to choose.
Here is the difference.
He trusts the government to order a woman to do what it thinks she ought to do.
I trust women to make the decisions that affect their lives, their destinies and their bodies.
And I think a woman's right to choose ought to be protected and defended.
 I don't think a president can unilaterally overturn it.
The FDA has made its decision.
 I think once a decision has been made, it's been made unless it's proven to be unsafe to women.
 Jim, the question you asked, if I heard you correctly, was would he support legislation to overturn it.
And if I heard the statement day before yesterday, you said you would order -- he said he would order his FDA appointee to review the decision.
Now that sounds to me a little bit different.
I just think that we ought to support the decision.
 I said I would make sure that women would be safe who used the drug.
 I am pro-life.
 The voters should assume I have no litmus test on that issue or any other issue.
Voters will know I'll put competent judges on the bench.
People who will strictly interpret the Constitution and not use the bench to write social policy.
That is going to be a big difference between my opponent and me.
I believe that the judges ought not to take the place of the legislative branch of government.
That they're appointed for life and that they ought to look at the Constitution as sacred.
They shouldn't misuse their bench.
I don't believe in liberal activist judges.
I believe in strict constructionists.
Those are the kind of judges I will appoint.
I've named four supreme court justices in the State of Texas and would ask the people to check out their qualifications, their deliberations.
They're good, solid men and women who have made good, sound judgments on behalf of the people of Texas.
 We both use similar language to reach an exactly opposite outcome.
I don't favor a litmus test, but I know that there are ways to assess how a potential justice interprets the Constitution.
And in my view, the Constitution ought to be interpreted as a document that grows with our country and our history.
And I believe, for example, that there is a right of privacy in the Fourth Amendment.
And when the phrase a strict constructionist is used and when the names of Scalia and Thomas are used as the benchmarks for who would be appointed, those are code words, and nobody should mistake this, for saying the governor would appoint people who would overturn Roe v. Wade.
It's very clear to me.
I would appoint people that have a philosophy that I think would have it quite likely they would uphold Roe v. Wade.
 It sounds like the vice president's not right very many times tonight.
I just told you the criteria on which I'll appoint judges.
I have a record of appointing judges in the State of Texas.
That's what a governor gets to do.
A governor gets to name supreme court judges.
He also reads all kinds of things into my tax plan and into my Medicare plan.
I want the viewers out there to listen to what I have to say about it.
 It would be likely that they would uphold Roe v. Wade.
I do believe it's wrong to use a litmus test.
If you look at the history of a lower court judge's rulings, you can get a pretty good idea of how they'll interpret questions.
A lot of questions are first impression, and these questions that have been seen many times come up in a new context and so -- but, you know, this is a very important issue.
Because a lot of young women in this country take this right for granted and it could be lost.
It is on the ballot in this election, make no mistake about it.
 I'll tell you what kind of judges he'll put on.
He'll put liberal activists justices who will use their bench to subvert the legislature, that's what he'll do.
 That's not right.
 Well, Milosevic has lost the election.
His opponent, Kostunica, has won the election.
It's overwhelming.
Milosevic's government refuses to release the vote count.
There's now a general strike going on.
They're demonstrating.
I think we should support the people of Serbia and Yugoslavia, as they call the Serbia plus Montenegro, and put pressure in every way possible to recognize the lawful outcome of the election.
The people of Serbia have acted very bravely in kicking this guy out of office.
Now he is trying to not release the votes and then go straight to a so-called runoff election without even announcing the results of the first vote.
Now, we've made it clear, along with our allies, that when Milosevic leaves, then Serbia will be able to have a more normal relationship with the rest of the world.
That is a very strong incentive that we've given them to do the right thing.
Bear in mind also, Milosevic has been indicted as a war criminal and he should be held accountable for his actions.
Now, we have to take measured steps because the sentiment within Serbia is, for understandable reasons, against the United States because their nationalism -- even if they don't like Milosevic, they still have some feelings lingering from the NATO action there.
So we have to be intelligent in the way we go about it.
But make no mistake about it, we should do everything we can to see that the will of the Serbian people expressed in this extraordinary election is done.
And I hope that he'll be out of office very shortly.
 Well, I'm pleased with the results of the election.
As the vice president is.
It's time for the man to go.
It means that the United States must have a strong diplomatic hand with our friends in NATO.
That's why it's important to make sure our alliances are as strong as they possibly can be to keep the pressure on Mr. Milosevic.
But this will be an interesting moment for the Russians to step up and lead as well.
Be a wonderful time for the Russians to step into the Balkans and convince Mr. Milosevic that it's in his best interest and his country's best interest to leave office.
The Russians have a lot of sway in that part of the world.
We would like to see the Russians use that sway to encourage democracy to take hold.
It's an encouraging election.
It's time for the man to leave.
 In this particular situation, no.
Bear in mind that we have a lot of sanctions in force against Serbia right now.
And the people of Serbia know that they can escape all those sanctions if this guy is turned out of power.
Now, I understand what the governor has said about asking the Russians to be involved, and under some circumstances that might be a good idea.
But being as they have not yet been willing to recognize Kostunica as the lawful winner of the election, I'm not sure it's right for us to invite the president of Russia to mediate this -- this dispute there because we might not like the results that comes out of that.
They currently favor going forward with a runoff election.
I think that's the wrong thing.
I think the governor's instinct is not necessarily bad because we have worked with the Russians in a constructive way in Kosovo, for example, to end the conflict there.
But I think we need to be very careful in the present situation before we invite the Russians to play the lead role in mediating.
 Well obviously we wouldn't use the Russians if they didn't agree with our answer, Mr. Vice President.
 They don't.
 Let me say this to you, I wouldn't use force.
I wouldn't use force.
 No.
 It's not in our national interest to use force in this case.
I would use pressure and diplomacy.
There is a difference with what the president did in Kosovo which I supported and this.
It's up to the people in this region to take control of their country.
 Well, if it's in our vital national interests, and that means whether our territory is threatened or people could be harmed, whether or not the alliances are -- our defense alliances are threatened, whether or not our friends in the Middle East are threatened.
That would be a time to seriously consider the use of force.
Secondly, whether or not the mission was clear.
Whether or not it was a clear understanding as to what the mission would be.
Thirdly, whether or not we were prepared and trained to win.
Whether or not our forces were of high morale and high standing and well-equipped.
And finally, whether or not there was an exit strategy.
I would take the use of force very seriously.
I would be guarded in my approach.
I don't think we can be all things to all people in the world.
I think we've got to be very careful when we commit our troops.
The vice president and I have a disagreement about the use of troops.
He believes in nation building.
I would be very careful about using our troops as nation builders.
I believe the role of the military is to fight and win war and therefore prevent war from happening in the first place.
So I would take my responsibility seriously.
And it starts with making sure we rebuild our military power.
Morale in today's military is too low.
We're having trouble meeting recruiting goals.
We met the goals this year, but in the previous years we have not met recruiting goals.
Some of our troops are not well-equipped.
I believe we're overextended in too many places.
And therefore I want to rebuild the military power.
It starts with a billion dollar pay raise for the men and women who wear the uniform.
A billion dollars more than the president recently signed into law.
It's to make sure our troops are well-housed and well-equipped.
Bonus plans to keep some of our high-skilled folks in the services and a commander in chief who clearly sets the mission.
The mission is to fight and win war and therefore prevent war from happening in the first place.
 Let me tell you what I'll do.
First of all  I want to make it clear, our military is the strongest, best-trained, best-equipped, best-led fighting force in the world and in the history of the world.
Nobody should have any doubt about that, least of all our adversaries or potential adversaries.
If you entrust me with the presidency, I will do whatever is necessary in order to make sure our forces stay the strongest in the world.
In fact, in my ten-year budget proposal I've set aside more than twice as much for this purpose as Governor Bush has in his proposal.
Now, I think we should be reluctant to get involved in someplace in a foreign country.
But if our national security is at stake, if we have allies, if we've tried every other course, if we're sure military action will succeed, and if the costs are proportionate to the benefits, we should get involved.
Now, just because we don't want to get involved everywhere doesn't mean we should back off anywhere it comes up.
I disagree with the proposal that maybe only when oil supplies are at stake that our national security is at risk.
I think that there are situations like in Bosnia or Kosovo where there's a genocide, where our national security is at stake there.
 I agree our military is the strongest in the world today, that's not the question.
The question is will it be the strongest in the years to come?
The warning signs are real.
Everywhere I go on the campaign trail I see moms and dads whose son or daughter may wear the uniform and they tell me about how discouraged their son or daughter may be.
A recent poll was taken among 1,000 enlisted personnel, as well as officers, over half of whom will leave the service when their time of enlistment is up.
The captains are leaving the service.
There is a problem.
And it's going to require a new commander in chief to rebuild the military power.
The other day I was honored to be flanked by Colin Powell and General Norman Schwartzkopf recently stood by me side and agreed with me.
They said even if we are the strongest if we don't do something if we don't have a clear vision of the military, if we don't stop extending our troops all around the world and nation building missions, then we're going to have a serious problem coming down the road, and I'm going to prevent that.
I'm going to rebuild our military power.
It's one of the major priorities of my administration.
 Well, they should look at our proposals and look at us as people and make up their own minds.
When I was a young man, I volunteered for the Army.
I served my country in Vietnam.
My father was a senator who strongly opposed the Vietnam War.
I went to college in this great city, and most of my peers felt against the war as I did.
But I went anyway because I knew if I didn't, somebody else in the small town of Carthage, Tennessee, would have to go in my place.
I served for eight years in the House of Representatives and I served on the Intelligence Committee, specialized in looking at arms control.
I served for eight years in the United States Senate and served on the Armed Services Committee.
For the last eight years I've served on the National Security Council, and when the conflict came up in Bosnia, I saw a genocide in the heart of Europe with the most violent war on the continent of Europe since World War II.
Look, that's where World War I started in the Balkans.
My uncle was a victim of poisonous gas there.
Millions of Americans saw the results of that conflict.
We have to be willing to make good, sound judgments.
Incidentally, I know the value of making sure our troops have the latest technology.
The governor has proposed skipping the next generation of weapons.
I think that's a big mistake, because I think we have to stay at the cutting edge.
 I think you've got to look at how one has handled responsibility in office.
Whether or not it's -- the same in domestic policy as well.
Whether or not you have the capacity to convince people to follow?
Whether or not one makes decisions based on sound principles or whether or not you rely upon polls and focus groups on how to decide what the course of action is.
We have too much polling and focus groups going on in Washington today.
We need decisions made on sound principles.
I've been the governor of a big state.
I think one of the hallmarks of my relationship in Austin, Texas, is that I've had the capacity to work with both Republicans and Democrats.
I think that's an important part of leadership.
I think what it means to build consensus.
I've shown I know how to do so.
Tonight in the audience there's one elected state senator who is a Democrat, a former state-wide officer who is a Democrat, a lot of Democrats who are here in the debate to -- because they want to show their support that shows I know how to lead.
And so the fundamental answer to your question, who can lead and who's shown the ability to get things done?
 If I could say one thing.
 One of the key points in foreign policy and national security policy is the need to re-establish the old-fashioned principle that politics ought to stop at the water's edge.
When I was in the United States Congress, I worked with former President Reagan to modernize our strategic weaponry and to pursue arms control in a responsible way.
When I was in the United States Senate I worked with former President Bush, your father.
I was one of only a few Democrats in the Senate to support the Persian Gulf War.
I think bipartisanship is a national asset.
We have to find ways to reestablish it in foreign policy and national security policy.
 Yeah.
Why haven't they done it in seven years?
 Oh, absolutely.
This is a very important moment in the history of our country.
Look, we've got the biggest surpluses in all of American history.
The key question that has to be answered in this election is will we use that prosperity wisely in a way that benefits all of our people and doesn't go just to the few.
Almost half of all the tax cut benefits, as I said under Governor Bush's plan, go to the wealthiest 1%.
I think we have to make the right and responsible choices.
I think we have to invest in education, protecting the environment, health care, a prescription drug benefit that goes to all seniors, not just to the poor, under Medicare, not relying on HMOs and insurance companies.
I think that we have to help parents and strengthen families by dealing with the kind of inappropriate entertainment material that families are just heart sick that their children are exposed to.
I think we've got to have welfare reform taken to the next stage.
I think that we have got to balance the budget every single year, pay down the national debt and, in fact, under my proposal the national debt will be completely eliminated by the year 2012.
I think we need to put Medicare and Social Security in a lockbox.
The governor will not put Medicare in a lockbox.
I don't think it should be used as a piggy bank for other programs.
I think it needs to be moved out of the budget and protected.
I'll veto anything that takes money out of Social Security or Medicare for anything other than Social Security or Medicare.
Now, the priorities are just very different.
I'll give you a couple of examples.
For every new dollar that I propose for spending on health care, Governor Bush spends $3 for a tax cut for the wealthiest 1%.
Now, for every dollar that I propose to spend on education, he spends $5 on a tax cut for the wealthiest 1%.
Those are very clear differences.
 The man is practicing fuzzy math again.
There's differences.
Under Vice President Gore's plan, he is going to grow the federal government in the largest increase since Lyndon Baines Johnson in 1965.
We're talking about a massive government, folks.
We're talking about adding to or increasing 200 programs, 20,000 new bureaucrats.
Imagine how many IRS agents it is going to take to be able to figure out his targeted tax cut for the middle class that excludes 50 million Americans.
There is a huge difference in this campaign.
He says he's going to give you tax cuts.
50 million of you won't receive it.
He said in his speech he wants to make sure the right people get tax relief.
That's not the role of a president to decide right and wrong.
Everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief.
After my plan is in place, the wealthiest Americans will pay a higher percentage of taxes then they do today, the poorest of Americans, six million families, won't pay any tax at all.
It's a huge difference.
A difference between big exploding federal government that wants to think on your behalf and a plan that meets priorities and liberates working people to be able to make decisions on your own.
 Let me just say, Jim, you haven't heard the governor deny these numbers.
He's called them phony and fuzzy.
The fact remains almost 30% of his proposed tax cut goes to -- only to Americans that make more than $1 million per year.
More money goes to the -- can I have a rebuttal here?
 Let me tell you what the facts are.
The facts are after my plan, the wealthiest of Americans pay more taxes of the percentage of the whole than they do today.
Secondly, if you're a family of four making $50,000 in Massachusetts, you get a 50% tax cut.
Let me give you one example.
The Strunk family in Allentown, Pennsylvania, I campaigned with them the other day.
They make $51,000 combined income, they pay about $3500 in taxes.
Under my plan, they get $1800 of tax relief.
Under Vice President Gore's plan, they get $145 of tax relief.
Now you tell me who stands on the side of the fence.
You ask the Strunks whose plan makes more sense.
There is a difference of opinion.
He would rather spend the family's $1800 and I would rather the Strunks spend their own money.
 No, I don't, and I'm not going to go to calling names on his facts.
I'm just gonna tell you what the real facts are.
The analysis that he's talking about leaves out more than half of the tax cuts that I have proposed.
And if you just add the numbers up, he still hasn't denied it, he spends more money on a tax cut for the wealthiest 1% than all his new proposals for prescription drugs, healthcare, education, and national defense combined.
Now those are the wrong priorities.
$665 billion over ten years for the wealthiest 1%.
As I said, almost 30% of it goes to Americans that make more than $1 million per year.
Every middle class family is eligible for a tax cut under my proposal.
Let me give you some specific examples.
I believe college tuition up to $10,000 per year ought to be tax deductible so middle-class families can choose to send their children to college.
I believe all senior citizens should be able to choose their own doctors and get prescription drugs from their own pharmacists with Medicare paying half the bill.
I believe parents ought to be able to make more choices need more public and charter school choice to send their kids always to a safe school.
We need to make education the number one priority in our country and treat teachers like the professionals that they are.
And that's why I have made it a number one priority in my budget, not a tax cut for the wealthy.
 Let me talk about tax cuts one more time.
This is a man whose plan excludes 50 million Americans.
 Not so.
 Take for example the marriage penalty.
If you itemize your tax return, you get no marriage penalty relief.
He picks and chooses.
He decides who the right people are.
It's a fundamental difference of opinion.
I want my fellow Americans to hear one more time.
We'll spend $25 trillion -- we'll collect $25 trillion in revenue in the next 10 years and spend $21 trillion.
Surely we can send 5% back to you that pay the bills.
There's a problem wait.
I want to say something, Jim.
This man has been disparaging my plan with all this Washington fuzzy math.
I want you to hear a problem we've got here in the USA.
If you're a single mother making $22,000 a year and you have two children, under this tax code, for every additional dollar you make, you pay a higher marginal rate on that dollar than someone making more than $200,000 a year, and that is not right.
My plan drops the rate from 15% to 10% and increases the child credit from $500 to $1,000 to make the code more fair for everybody, not just a few, not just a handful.
Everybody who pays taxes ought to get some relief.
 We can make a huge difference by saying if you receive federal money we expect you to show results.
Let me give you a story about public education, if I might.
It's about Kipp Academy in Houston, Texas.
A charter school run by some people from Teach For America.
Young folks saying I'm going to do something good for my country.
I want to teach.
A guy named Michael runs the school.
It is a school full of so-called at-risk children.
It's how we unfortunately label certain children.
Basically it means they can't learn.
It's a school of strong discipline and high standards.
It's one of the best schools in Houston.
Here are the key ingredients.
High expectations, strong accountabily.
What Michael says, don't put all these rules on us, just let us teach and hold us accountable for every grade.
That's what we do.
And as a result, these mainly Hispanic youngsters are some of the best learners in Houston, Texas.
That's my vision for public education all around America.
Many of you viewers don't know, but Laura and I sent our girls to public school.
They went to Austin High School.
And many of the public schools are meeting the call.
But, unfortunately, a lot of schools are trapping children in schools that just won't teach and won't change.
Here is the role of the federal government.
One is to change Head Start to a reading program.
Two is to say if you want to access reading money, you can do so.
The goal is for every single child to learn to Read.
there must by K-2 diagnostic teaching tools, teacher training money, available.
Three, we have to consolidate the federal programs to free districts to free the schools and encourage innovators like Michael.
Let them reach out beyond the confines of the current structure to recruit teach-for-the-children type teachers.
Four, we're going to say if you receive federal money, measure third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grade.
Show us if they are learning to read, write, add and subtract and if so there will be bonus plans.
But if not, instead of continuing to subsidize failure, the money will go to -- the federal money will go to the parents for public school or charter school or tutorial or Catholic school.
What I care about is children.
And so does Michael Feinberg.
And you know what?
It can happen in America with the right kind of leadership.
 We agree on a couple of things on education.
I strongly support new accountability, so does Governor Bush.
I strongly support local control, so does Governor Bush.
I'm in favor of testing as a way of measuring performance.
Every school and every school district, have every state test the children.
I've also proposed a voluntary national test in the fourth grade and eighth grade, and a form of testing the governor has not endorsed.
I think that all new teachers ought to be tested in the subjects that they teach.
We've got to recruit 100,000 new teachers.
And I have budgeted for that.
We've got to reduce the class size so that the student who walks in has more one-on-one time with the teacher.
We ought to have universal pre-school and we ought to make college tuition tax deductible, up to $10,000 a year.
I would like to tell you a quick story.
I got a letter today as I left Sarasota, Florida.
I'm here with a group of 13 people from around the country who helped me prepare.
We had a great time.
Two days ago we ate lunch at a restaurant.
The guy that served us lunch gave me a letter today.
His name is Randy Ellis.
He has a 15-year-old daughter named Caley, who is in Sarasota High School.
Her science class was supposed to be for 24 students.
She's the 36th student in that classroom.
They sent me a picture of her in the classroom.
They can't squeeze another desk in for her, so she has to stand during class.
I want the federal government, consistent with local control and new accountability, to make improvement of our schools the number one priority so Caley will have a desk and can sit down in a classroom where she can learn.
 The first is, the difference is there is no new accountability measures in Vice President Gore's plan.
He says he's for voluntary testing.
You can't have voluntary testing.
You must have mandatory testing.
You must say that if you receive money you must show us whether or not children are learning to read and write and add and subtract.
That's the difference.
You may claim you've got mandatory testing but you don't, Mr. Vice President.
That's a huge difference.
Testing is the cornerstone of reform.
You know how I know?
Because it's the cornerstone of reform in the State of Texas.
Republicans and Democrats came together and said what can we do to make our public education the best in the country?
We've done a long way working together to do so.
The cornerstone is to have strong accountability in return for money and in return for flexibility.
We're going to ask you to show us whether or not -- we ask you to post the results on the Internet.
We encourage parents to take a look at the comparative results of schools.
We have a strong charter school movement that I signed the legislation to get started in the State of Texas.
I believe if we find poor children trapped in schools that won't teach, we need to free the parents.
We need to expand education savings accounts.
Something that the vice president's running mate supports.
There's big differences.
He won't support freeing local districts from the strings of federal money.
 First of all, I do have mandatory testing.
I think the governor may not have heard what I said clearly.
The voluntary national testing is in addition to the mandatory testing that we require of states.
All schools, all school districts, students themselves, and required teacher testing, which goes a step farther than Governor Bush has been willing to go.
Here are a couple of differences, though, Jim.
Governor Bush is in favor of vouchers which take taxpayer money away from public schools and give them to private schools that are not accountable for how the money is used and don't have to take all applicants.
Now, private schools play a great role in our society.
All of our children have gone to both public schools and private schools.
But I don't think private schools should have a right to take taxpayer money away from public schools at a time when Caley Ellis is standing in that classroom.
Let me give you another example.
I went to a school in Dade County, Florida where the facilities are so overcrowded the children have to eat lunch in shifts with the first shift for lunch starting at 9:30 in the morning.
Look, this is a funding crisis all around the country.
There are fewer parents of school-age children as a percentage of the voting population and there is the largest generation of students ever.
We're in an information age when learning is more important than ever.
90% of our kids go to public schools.
We have to make it the number one priority.
Modernize our schools, reduce class size, recruit new teachers, give every child a chance to learn with one-on-one time in a quality -- high-quality, safe school.
If it's a failing school, shut it down and reopen it under a new principal with a turnaround team of specialists the way Governor Jim Hunt does in North Carolina.
Here is another difference.
The governor, if it's a failing school, would leave the children in that failing school for three years and then give a little bit of money to the parents, a down payment on a down payment for private school tuition, and pretend that that would be enough for them to go out and go to a private school.
It's an illusion.
 Okay.
First of all, most of good governance is at the state level.
See, here is the mentality.
I'm going to make the state do this and make the state do that.
All I'm saying is if you spend money, show us results and test every year, which you do not do, Mr. Vice President.
You don't test every year.
You can say you do to the cameras but you don't, unless you've changed your plan here on the stage.
 I didn't say that.
 You need to test every year.
That's how you determine if children are progressing to excellence.
Secondly, one of the things that we have to be careful about in politics is throwing money at a system that has not yet been reformed.
More money is needed and I spend more money, but step one is to make sure we reform the system to have the system in place that leaves no child behind.
Stop this business about asking gosh, how old are you?
If you're 10 we'll put you here, 12 you put here.
Start asking the question, what do you know?
If you don't know what you're supposed to know, we'll make sure you do early before it's too late.
 When the action in Kosovo was dragging on and we were searching for a solution to the problem, our country had defeated the adversary on the battlefield without a single American life being lost in combat.
But the dictator Milosevic was hanging on.
I invited the former prime minister of Russia to my house and took a risk in asking him to get personally involved, along with the head of Finland, to go to Belgrade and to take a set of proposals from the United States that would constitute basically a surrender by Serbia.
But it was a calculated risk that paid off.
Now, I could probably give you some other examples of decisions over the last 24 years.
I have been in public service for 24 years, Jim.
And throughout all that time the people I have fought for have been the middle-class families, and I have been willing to stand up to powerful interests like the big insurance companies, the drug companies, the HMOs, the oil companies.
They have good people and they play constructive roles sometimes, but sometimes they get too much power.
I cast my lot with the people even when it means that you have to stand up to some powerful interests who are trying to turn the -- the policies and the laws to their advantage.
You can see it in this campaign.
The big drug companies support Governor Bush's prescription drug proposal.
They oppose mine because they don't want to get Medicare involved because they're afraid that Medicare will negotiate lower prices for seniors who currently pay the highest prices of all.
 I've been standing up to big Hollywood, big trial lawyers.
Was  what was the question?
It was about emergencies, wasn't it?
 You know, as governor, one of the things you have to deal with is catastrophe.
I can remember the fires that swept Parker County, Texas.
I remember the floods that swept our state.
I remember going down to Del Rio, Texas.
I have to pay the administration a compliment.
James Lee Witt of FEMA has done a really good job of working with governors during times of crisis.
But that's the time when you're tested not only -- it's the time to test your mettle, a time to test your heart when you see people whose lives have been turned upside down.
It broke my heart to go to the flood scene in Del Rio where a fellow and his family got completely uprooted.
The only thing I knew to do was to get aid as quickly as possible with state and federal help, and to put my arms around the man and his family and cry with them.
That's what governors do.
They are often on the front line of catastrophic situations.
 Well, it depends, obviously.
But what I would do first and foremost, is I would get in touch with the Federal Reserve Chairman, Alan Greenspan, to find out all the facts and all the circumstances.
I would have my Secretary of the Treasury be in touch with the financial centers not only here, but at home.
I would make sure that key members of Congress were called in to discuss the gravity of the situation.
And I would come up with a game plan to deal with it.
That's what governors end up doing.
We end up being problem solvers.
We come up with practical, common sense solutions for problems that we're confronted with.
In this case, in the case of a financial crisis, I would gather all the facts before I made the decision as to what the government ought or ought not to do.
 First I want to compliment the governor on his response to those fires and floods in Texas.
I accompanied James Lee Witt down to Texas when those fires broke out.
And FEMA has been a major flagship project of our reinventing government efforts.
And I agree, it works extremely well now.
On the international financial crises that come up, my friend, Bob Rubin, the former Secretary of Treasury is here, he's a close advisor to me and great friend in all respects.
I have had a chance to work with him and Alan Greenspan and others on the crisis following the collapse of the Mexican peso.
When the Asian financial crisis raised the risk of world-wide recession that could affect our economy, And now, of course, the euro's value has been dropping, but seems to be under control.
But it started for me in the last eight years when I had the honor of casting the tie-breaking vote to end the old economic plan here at home and put into place a new economic plan that has helped us to make some progress, 22 million new jobs, the greatest prosperity ever.
But it's not good enough.
My attitude is you ain't seen nothing yet.
We need to do more and better.
 No, there's no difference on that.
There is a difference, though, as to what the economy has meant.
I think the economy has meant more for the Gore and Clinton folks than the Gore and Clinton folks have meant for the economy.
I think most of the economic growth that has taken place is a result of ingenuity and hard work and entrepreneurship and that's the role of goverment to encourage that.
In terms of in response to the question, no.
 Can I comment on that?
 You know, I think the American people deserve credit for the great economy that we have.
It's their ingenuity, I agree with that.
But you know, they were working pretty hard eight years ago.
And now they had ingenuity eight years ago.
The difference is we've got a new policy.
And instead of concentrating on tax cuts mostly for the wealthy, we want -- I want tax cuts for the middle-class families and I want to continue the prosperity and make sure that it enriches not just a few but all of our families.
We have gone from the biggest deficits to the biggest surpluses.
We have gone from a triple-dip recession during the previous 12 years to a tripling of the stock market.
Instead of a high unemployment, we have the lowest African-American and Latin American unemployment rates in history and 22 million new jobs.
It's not good enough.
Too many people have been left behind.
We have got to do much more.
The key is job training, education, investments in health care and education, environment, retirement security.
And incidentally, we have got to preserve Social Security.
I'm totally opposed to diverting one out of every six dollars out of the Social Security trust fund, as the Governor has proposed, into the stock market.
I want new incentives for savings and investment for the young couples who are working hard so they can save and invest on their own on top of Social Security, not at the expense of Social Security, as the governor proposes.
 Two points.
One, a lot of folks are still waiting for that 1992 middle-class tax cut.
I remember the vice president saying, "Just give us a chance to get up there, we're going to make sure you get tax cuts."
It didn't happen.
Now he's having to say that again.
They've had their chance to deliver a tax cut to you.
Secondly, the surest way to bust this economy is to increase the role and size of the federal budget.
The Senate Budget Committee did a study of the vice president's expenditures.
It's been projected that they could conceivably bust the budget by $900 billion.
That means he'll either have to raise your taxes by $900 billion or go into the Social Security surplus for $900 billion.
This is a plan that is going to increase the bureaucracy by 20,000 people.
His targeted tax cut is so detailed, so much fine print that it is going to require numerous IRS agents.
We need somebody to simplify the code, to be fair, to continue prosperity by sharing some of the surplus with the people who pay the bills, particularly those at the bottom end of the economic ladder.
 If I could respond, Jim.
What he's quoting is not the Senate Budget Commiitte, it is a partisan press release by the Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee that's not worth the government -- the taxpayer-paid paper that it's printed on.
Now, as for 20,000 new bureaucrats, as you call them, you know, the size of the federal government will go down in a Gore administration.
In the reinventing government program you just look at the numbers.
It is 300,000 people smaller today than it was eight years ago.
Now, the fact is you're going to have a hard time convincing folks that we were a whole lot better off eight years ago than we are today.
But that's not the question.
The question is, will we be better off four years from now than we are today?
And as for the surest way to threaten our prosperity, having a $1.9 trillion tax cut, almost half of which goes to the wealthy, and a $1 trillion Social Security privatization proposal is the surest way to put our budget into deficit  raise interest rates and put our prosperity at risk.
 I can't let the man continue with fuzzy math.
It is 1.3 trillion Mr. Vice President.
It will go to everybody who pays taxes.
I'm not going to be the kind of president that says you get tax relief and you don't.
I'm not going to be a picker and chooser.
What is fair is everybody who pays taxes ought to get relief.
 Suits me.
 I do disagree.
Because if we can keep our prosperity going, if we can continue balancing the budget and paying down the debt, then the strong economy keeps generating surpluses.
Here is my plan.
I will keep Social Security in a lockbox and that pays down the national debt.
And the interest savings I would put right back into Social Security.
That extends the life of Social Security for 55 years.
Now, I think that it's very important to understand that cutting benefits under Social Security means that people like Winifred Skinner from Des Moines, Iowa, who is here, would really have a much harder time.
Because there are millions of seniors who are living almost hand to mouth.
And you talk about cutting benefits.
I don't go along with it.
I am opposed to it.
I'm also opposed to a plan that diverts 1 out of every $6 away from the Social Security Trust Fund.
Social Security is a trust fund that pays the checks this year with the money that is paid into Social Security this year.
The governor wants to divert 1 out of every $6 off into the stock market, which means that he would drain a trillion dollars out of the Social Security Trust Fund in this generation over the next ten years, and Social Security under that approach would go bankrupt within this generation.
His leading advisor on this plan actually said that would be okay, because then the Social Security Trust Fund could start borrowing.
It would borrow up to $3 trillion.
Now, Social Security has never done that.
And I don't think it should do that.
I think it should stay in a lockbox, and I'll tell you this.
I will veto anything that takes money out of Social Security for privatization or anything else other than Social Security.
 I thought it was interesting that on the two minutes he spent about a million-and-a-half on my plan, which means he doesn't want you to know what he's doing is loading up IOUs for future generations.
He puts no real assets into the Social Security system.
The revenues exceed the expenses in Social Security until the year 2015 which means all retirees are going to get the promises made.
For those of you who he wants to scare into the voting booth to vote for him, hear me loud and clear.
A promise made will be a promise kept.
You bet we want to allow younger workers to take some of their own money.
That's the difference of opinion.
The vice president thinks it's the government's money.
The payroll taxes are your money.
You ought to put it in prudent, safe investments so that $1 trillion over the next ten years grows to be $3 trillion.
The money stays within the Social Security system.
It's a part of the Social Security system.
He claims it will be out of Social Security.
It's your money, it's a part of your retirement benefit.
It's a fundamental difference between what we believe.
I want you to have your own asset that you can call your own.
That you can pass on from one generation to the next.
I want to get a better rate of return for your own money than the paltry 2% that the current Social Security Trust gets today.
Mr. Greenspan I thought missed an opportunity to say there's a third way, and that is to get a better rate of return on the Social Security monies coming into the trust.
There is $2.3 trillion of surplus that we can use to make sure that younger workers have a Social Security plan in the future.
If we're smart and if we trust workers and if we understand the power of the compounding rate of interest.
 Here is the difference.
I give a new incentive for younger workers to save their own money and invest their own money, but not at the expense of Social Security, on top of Social Security.
My plan is Social Security plus.
The governor's plan is Social Security minus.
Your future benefits would be cut by the amount that's diverted into the stock market.
If you make bad investments, that's too bad.
But even before then the problem hits because the money contributed to Social Security this year is an entitlement.
That's how it works.
And the money is used to pay the benefits for seniors this year.
If you cut the amount going in 1 out of every $6, then you have to cut the value of each check by 1 out of every $6 unless you come up with the money from somewhere else.
I would like to know from the governor -- I know we're not supposed to ask each other questions -- but I'd be interested in knowing, does that trillion dollars come from the trust fund, or does it come from the rest of the budget?
 No.
There's enough money to pay seniors today in the current affairs of Social Security.
The trillion comes from the surplus.
Surplus is money -- more money than needed.
Let me tell you what your plan is.
It's not Social Security plus, it's Social Security plus huge debt.
That is what it is.
You leave future generations with tremendous IOUs.
It's time to have a leader that doesn't put off tomorrow what we should do today.
It's time to have somebody to step up and say look, let's let younger workers take some of their own money and under certain guidelines invest it in the private markets.
The safest of federal investments yields 4%.
That's twice the amount of rate of return than the current Social Security Trust.
It's a fundamental difference of opinion here, folks.
Younger worker after younger worker hears my call that says I trust you.
And you know what, the issue is changing.
Seniors now understand that the promise made will be a promise kept, but younger workers now understand we better have a government that trusts them and that's exactly what I'm going to do.
 Could I respond to that, Jim?
This is a big issue.
Could we do another round on it?
 Just briefly.
When FDR established Social Security, they didn't call them IOUs, they called it the full faith and credit of the United States.
If you don't have trust in that, I do.
If you take it out of the surplus in the trust fund, that means the trust fund goes bankrupt in this generation within 20 years.
 This is a government that thinks a 2% rate of return on your money is satisfactory.
It's not.
This is a government that says younger workers can't possibly have their own assets.
We need to think differently about the issue.
We need to make sure our seniors get the promise made.
If we don't trust younger workers to manage some of their own money with the Social Security surplus, to grow from $1 trillion to $3 trillion, it will be impossible to bridge the gap without it.
What Mr. Gore's plan will do causing huge payroll taxes or major benefit reductions.
 The man loves his wife and I appreciate that a lot.
And I love mine.
The man loves his family a lot, and I appreciate that, because I love my family.
I think the thing that discouraged me about the vice president was uttering those famous words, "No controlling legal authority."
I felt like there needed to be a better sense of responsibility of what was going on in the White House.
I believe that -- I believe they've moved that sign, "The buck stops here" from the Oval Office desk to "The buck stops here" on the Lincoln bedroom.
It's not good for the country and it's not right.
We need to have a new look about how we conduct ourselves in office.
There's a huge trust.
I see it all the time when people come up to me and say, I don't want you to let me down again.
And we can do better than the past administration has done.
It's time for a fresh start.
It's time for a new look.
It's time for a fresh start after a season of cynicism.
And so I don't know the man well, but I've been disappointed about how he and his administration have conducted the fundraising affairs.
You know, going to a Buddhist temple and then claiming it wasn't a fundraiser isn't my view of responsibility.
 I think we ought to attack our country's problems, not attack each other.
I want to spend my time making this country even better than it is, not trying to make you out to be a bad person.
You may want to focus on scandal.
I want to focus on results.
As I said a couple of months ago, I stand here as my own man and I want you to see me for who I really am.
Tipper and I have been married for 30 years.
We became grandparents a year-and-a-half ago.
We've got four children.
I have devoted 24 years of my life to public service and I've said this before and I'll say it again, if you entrust me with the presidency, I may not be the most exciting politician, but I will work hard for you every day.
I will fight for middle-class families and working men and women and I will never let you down.
 They ought to factor in it when they go to the voting booth.
 I think people need to be held responsible for the actions they take in life.
I think that -- well, I think that's part of the need for a cultural change.
We need to say we each need to be responsible for what we do.
People in the highest office of the land must be responsible for decisions they make in life.
And that's the way I've conducted myself as Governor of Texas and that's the way I'll conduct myself as President of the United States, should I be fortunate enough to earn your vote.
 No.
I think the American people should take into account who we are as individuals, what our experience is, what our positions are on the issues and proposals are.
I'm asking you to see me for who I really am.
I'm offering you my own vision, my own experience, my own proposals.
And incidentally, one of them is this.
This current campaign financing system has not reflected credit on anybody in either party.
And that's one of the reasons I've said before, and I'll pledge here tonight, if I'm president, the very first bill that Joe Lieberman and I will send to the United States Congress is the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform bill.
And the reason it's that important is that all of the other issues, whether prescription drugs for all seniors that are opposed by the drug companies or the patient's bill of rights to take the decisions away from the HMOs and give them to the doctors and nurses, opposed by the HMOs and insurance companies, all these other proposals are going to be a lot easier to get passed for the American people if we limit the influence of special interest money and give democracy back to the American people.
And I wish Governor Bush would join me this evening in endorsing the McCain-Feingold Campaign Finance Reform Bill.
 You know, this man has no credibility on the issue.
As a matter of fact, I read in the "New York Times" where he said he co-sponsored the McCain-Feingold Campaign Fundraising Bill.
But he wasn't in the Senate with Senator Feingold.
And so, look, I'm going to -- what you need to know about me is I will uphold the law, I'm going to have an attorney general that enforces the law.
The time for campaign funding reform is after the election.
This man has outspent me and the special interests are outspending me.
And I am not going to lay down my arms in the middle of the campaign for somebody who has got no credibility on the issue.
 I would support an effort to ban corporate soft money and labor union soft money so long as there was dues check-off.
I've campaigned on this since the primaries.
I believe there needs to be instant disclosure on the Internet as to who has given to who.
I think we need to fully enforce the law.
I think we need to have an attorney general that says if a law is broken, we'll enforce it.
Be strict and firm about it.
 Look, Governor Bush, you have attacked my character and credibility and I am not going to respond in kind.
I think we ought to focus on the problems and not attack each other.
One of the serious problems, hear me well, is that our system of government is being undermined by too much influence coming from special interest money.
We have to get a handle on it.
And like John McCain, I have learned from experience, and it's not a new position for me.
24 years ago I supported full public financing of all federal elections.
And anybody who thinks I'm just saying it, it will be the first bill I send to the Congress.
I want you to know I care passionately about this and I will fight until it becomes law.
 I want people to hear what he just said.
He is for full public financing of Congressional elections.
I'm absolutely, adamently opposed to that.
I don't want the government financing congressional elections.
 Thank you, Jim.
Thank the University of Massachusetts and Mr. Vice President, thank you.
It has been a good, lively exchange.
There is a huge difference of opinion.
Mine is I want to empower people in their own lives.
I also want to go to Washington to get some positive things done.
It is going to require a new spirit.
A spirit of cooperation.
It will require the ability of a Republican president to reach out across the partisan divide and to say to Democrats, let's come together to do what is right for America.
It's been my record as Governor of Texas, it will be how I conduct myself if I'm fortunate enough to earn your vote as President of the United States.
I want to finally get something done on Medicare.
I want to make sure prescription drugs are available for all seniors.
And I want seniors to have additional choices when it comes to choosing their health care plans.
I want to finally get something done on Social Security.
I want to make sure the seniors have the promise made will be a promise kept, but I want younger workers to be able to manage some of their own money, some of their own payroll taxes in the private sector under certain guidelines to get a better rate of return on your own money.
I want to rebuild our military to keep the peace.
I want to have a strong hand when it comes to the United States in world affairs.
I don't want to try to put our troops in all places at all times.
I don't want to be the world's policeman, I want to be the world's peacemaker by having a military of high morale and a military that is well-equipped.
I want anti-ballistic missile systems to protect ourselves and our allies from a rogue nation that may try to hold us hostage or blackmail our allies and friends.
I want to make sure the education system fulfills its hope and promise.
I've had a strong record of working with Democrats and Republicans in Texas to make sure no child is left behind.
I understand the limited role of the federal government, but it could be a constructive role when it comes to reform, by insisting that there be a strong accountability systems.
My intentions are to earn your vote and earn your confidence.
I'm asking for your vote.
I want you to be on my team.
And for those of you working, thanks from the bottom of my heart.
For those of you making up your mind, I would be honored to have your support.
 I want to thank everybody who watched and listened tonight because this is indeed a crucial time in American history.
We're at a fork in the road.
We have this incredible prosperity, but a lot of people have been left behind.
And we have a very important decision to make.
Will we use the prosperity to enrich all of our families and not just a few?
One important way of looking at this is to ask who are you going to fight for?
Throughout my career in public service, I have fought for the working men and women of this country, middle-class families.
Why?
Because you are the ones who have the hardest time paying taxes, the hardest time making ends meet.
You are the ones who are making car payments and mortgage payments and doing right by your kids.
And a lot of times there are powerful forces that are against you.
Make no mistake about it, they do have undue influence in Washington, D.C. and it makes a difference if you have a president who will fight for you.
I know one thing about the position of president, it's the only position in our Constitution that is filled by an individual who is given the responsibility to fight not just for one state or one district or the well-connected or wealthy, but to fight for all of the people, including especially those who most need somebody who will stand up and take on whatever powerful forces might stand in the way.
There is a woman named Winifred Skinner here tonight from Iowa.
I mentioned her earlier.
She's 79 years old.
She has Social Security.
I'm not going to cut her benefits or support any proposal that would.
She gets a small pension, but in order to pay for her prescription drug benefits, she has to go out seven days a week several hours a day picking up cans.
She came all the way from Iowa in a Winnebago with her poodle in order attend here tonight.
I want to tell her, I'll fight for a prescription drug benefit for all seniors and fight for the people of this country for a prosperity that benefits all.
 Yes, I do.
 I, too, thank the University of Miami, and say our prayers are with the good people of this state, who've suffered a lot.
 No, I don't believe it's going to happen.
I believe I'm going to win, because the American people know I know how to lead.
I've shown the American people I know how to lead.
 I believe in being strong and resolute and determined.
And I will hunt down and kill the terrorists, wherever they are.
 Well, where do you want me to begin?
 My opponent looked at the same intelligence I looked at and declared in 2002 that Saddam Hussein was a grave threat.
 Jim, we've got the capability of doing both.
 The president just talked about Iraq as a center of the war on terror.
Iraq was not even close to the center of the war on terror before the president invaded it.
 Can I respond to that?
 Thank you, sir.
First of all, what my opponent wants you to forget is that he voted to authorize the use of force and now says it's the wrong war at the wrong time at the wrong place.
 Yes, we have to be steadfast and resolved, and I am.
And I will succeed for those troops, now that we're there.
We have to succeed.
We can't leave a failed Iraq.
But that doesn't mean it wasn't a mistake of judgment to go there and take the focus off of Osama bin Laden.
It was.
Now, we can succeed.
But I don't believe this president can.
I think we need a president who has the credibility to bring the allies back to the table and to do what's necessary to make it so America isn't doing this alone.
 Jim, let me tell you exactly what I'll do.
And there are a long list of thing.
First of all, what kind of mixed message does it send when you have $500 million going over to Iraq to put police officers in the streets of Iraq, and the president is cutting the COPS program in America?
 I don't think we want to get to how he's going to pay for all these promises.
It's like a huge tax gap.
Anyway, that's for another debate.
 The president just said the FBI had changed its culture.
We just read on the front pages of America's papers that there are over 100,000 hours of tapes, unlistened to.
On one of those tapes may be the enemy being right the next time.
 Of course we're doing everything we can to protect America.
I wake up every day thinking about how best to protect America.
That's my job.
 Let me first tell you that the best way for Iraq to be safe and secure is for Iraqi citizens to be trained to do the job.
 Thank you, Jim.
 I think it's worthy for a follow-up.
 My opponent says help is on the way, but what kind of message does it say to our troops in harm's way, "wrong war, wrong place, wrong time"?
Not a message a commander in chief gives, or this is a "great diversion."
 Well, you know, when I talked about the $87 billion, I made a mistake in how I talk about the war.
But the president made a mistake in invading Iraq.
Which is worse?
 No, and they don't have to, providing we have the leadership that we put -- that I'm offering.
 That's totally absurd.
Of course, the U.N. was invited in.
And we support the U.N. efforts there.
They pulled out after Sergio de Mello got killed.
But they're now back in helping with elections.
 The United Nations, Kofi Annan offered help after Baghdad fell.
And we never picked him up on that and did what was necessary to transfer authority and to transfer reconstruction.
It was always American-run.
 Well, actually, he forgot Poland.
And now there's 30 nations involved, standing side by side with our American troops.
 No, what I said was that, because we achieved such a rapid victory, more of the Saddam loyalists were around.
I mean, we thought we'd whip more of them going in.
 What I think troubles a lot of people in our country is that the president has just sort of described one kind of mistake.
But what he has said is that, even knowing there were no weapons of mass destruction, even knowing there was no imminent threat, even knowing there was no connection with Al Qaida, he would still have done everything the same way.
Those are his words.
 Well, I've never, ever used the harshest word, as you did just then.
And I try not to.
I've been -- but I'll nevertheless tell you that I think he has not been candid with the American people.
And I'll tell you exactly how.
 My opponent just said something amazing.
He said Osama bin Laden uses the invasion of Iraq as an excuse to spread hatred for America.
Osama bin Laden isn't going to determine how we defend ourselves.
 I wasn't misleading when I said he was a threat.
Nor was I misleading on the day that the president decided to go to war when I said that he had made a mistake in not building strong alliances and that I would have preferred that he did more diplomacy.
 The only thing consistent about my opponent's position is that he's been inconsistent.
He changes positions.
And you cannot change positions in this war on terror if you expect to win.
 You know, every life is precious.
Every life matters.
You know, my hardest -- the hardest part of the job is to know that I committed the troops in harm's way and then do the best I can to provide comfort for the loved ones who lost a son or a daughter or a husband or wife.
 I understand what the president is talking about, because I know what it means to lose people in combat.
And the question, is it worth the cost, reminds me of my own thinking when I came back from fighting in that war.
 Yes, I understand what it means to the commander in chief.
And if I were to ever say, "This is the wrong war at the wrong time at the wrong place," the troops would wonder, how can I follow this guy?
 Secretary of State Colin Powell told this president the Pottery Barn rule: If you break it, you fix it.
 The time line that I've set out -- and again, I want to correct the president, because he's misled again this evening on what I've said.
I didn't say I would bring troops out in six months.
I said, if we do the things that I've set out and we are successful, we could begin to draw the troops down in six months.
 There are 100,000 troops trained, police, guard, special units, border patrol.
There's going to be 125,000 trained by the end of this year.
Yes, we're getting the job done.
It's hard work.
Everybody knows it's hard work, because there's a determined enemy that's trying to defeat us.
 I couldn't agree more that the Iraqis want to be free and that they could be free.
 Yes, let me...
 The reason why Prime Minister Allawi said they're coming across the border is because he recognizes that this is a central part of the war on terror.
They're fighting us because they're fighting freedom.
 I would hope I never have to.
I understand how hard it is to commit troops.
Never wanted to commit troops.
When I was running -- when we had the debate in 2000, never dreamt I'd be doing that.
 Jim, the president just said something extraordinarily revealing and frankly very important in this debate.
In answer to your question about Iraq and sending people into Iraq, he just said, "The enemy attacked us."
 First of all, of course I know Osama bin Laden attacked us.
I know that.
 Thirty-five to forty countries in the world had a greater capability of making weapons at the moment the president invaded than Saddam Hussein.
And while he's been diverted, with 9 out of 10 active duty divisions of our Army, either going to Iraq, coming back from Iraq, or getting ready to go, North Korea's gotten nuclear weapons and the world is more dangerous.
Iran is moving toward nuclear weapons and the world is more dangerous.
Darfur has a genocide.
 Let me -- I'm not exactly sure what you mean, "passes the global test," you take preemptive action if you pass a global test.
 North Korea, first, I do.
Let me say -- I certainly hope so.
Before I was sworn in, the policy of this government was to have bilateral negotiations with North Korea.
 With respect to Iran, the British, French, and Germans were the ones who initiated an effort without the United States, regrettably, to begin to try to move to curb the nuclear possibilities in Iran.
I believe we could have done better.
I think the United States should have offered the opportunity to provide the nuclear fuel, test them, see whether or not they were actually looking for it for peaceful purposes.
If they weren't willing to work a deal, then we could have put sanctions together.
The president did nothing.
 Right.
 Both.
I want bilateral talks which put all of the issues, from the armistice of 1952, the economic issues, the human rights issues, the artillery disposal issues, the DMZ issues and the nuclear issues on the table.
 The minute we have bilateral talks, the six-party talks will unwind.
That's exactly what Kim Jong Il wants.
And by the way, the breach on the agreement was not through plutonium.
The breach on the agreement is highly enriched uranium.
That's what we caught him doing.
That's where he was breaking the agreement.
 Well, I'll tell you exactly why not, but I first want to say something about those sanctions on Iran.
 Back to Iran, just for a second.
 That's a loaded question.
Well, first of all, I admire Senator Kerry's service to our country.
I admire the fact that he is a great dad.
I appreciate the fact that his daughters have been so kind to my daughters in what has been a pretty hard experience for, I guess, young girls, seeing their dads out there campaigning.
 Well, first of all, I appreciate enormously the personal comments the president just made.
And I share them with him.
I think only if you're doing this -- and he's done it more than I have in terms of the presidency -- can you begin to get a sense of what it means to your families.
And it's tough.
And so I acknowledge that his daughters -- I've watched them.
 I'm trying to put a leash on them.
 Well, I know.
I've learned not to do that.
 Thank you.
 ... and a great first lady.
 Well, I think -- listen, I fully agree that one should shift tactics, and we will, in Iraq.
Our commanders have got all the flexibility to do what is necessary to succeed.
 I have no intention of wilting.
I've never wilted in my life.
And I've never wavered in my life.
 Nuclear proliferation.
Nuclear proliferation.
There's some 600-plus tons of unsecured material still in the former Soviet Union and Russia.
At the rate that the president is currently securing it, it'll take 13 years to get it.
 Actually, we've increased funding for dealing with nuclear proliferation about 35 percent since I've been the president.
Secondly, we've set up what's called the -- well, first of all, I agree with my opponent that the biggest threat facing this country is weapons of mass destruction in the hands of a terrorist network.
And that's why proliferation is one of the centerpieces of a multi-prong strategy to make the country safer.
 In the hands of a terrorist enemy.
 Weapons of mass destruction, nuclear proliferation.
 Again, I can't tell you how big a mistake I think that is, to have bilateral talks with North Korea.
It's precisely what Kim Jong Il wants.
It will cause the six-party talks to evaporate.
It will mean that China no longer is involved in convincing, along with us, for Kim Jong Il to get rid of his weapons.
It's a big mistake to do that.
 No, I don't think it's OK, and said so publicly.
I think that there needs to be checks and balances in a democracy, and made that very clear that by consolidating power in the central government, he's sending a signal to the Western world and United States that perhaps he doesn't believe in checks and balances, and I told him that.
 Well, let me just say quickly that I've had an extraordinary experience of watching up close and personal that transition in Russia, because I was there right after the transformation.
And I was probably one of the first senators, along with Senator Bob Smith of New Hampshire, a former senator, to go down into the KGB underneath Treblinka Square and see reams of files with names in them.
 You know my opinion on North Korea.
I can't say it any more plainly.
 Pardon me?
 Oh, I'm a pretty calm guy.
I don't take it personally.
 You know, we looked at the same intelligence and came to the same conclusion: that Saddam Hussein was a grave threat.
 It was a threat.
That's not the issue.
The issue is what you do about it.
 Thank you, Jim, very much.
 Thank you very much tonight, Jim.
Senator.
 Well, thank you very much, Jim, and thanks to the commission and the University of Mississippi, Ole Miss, for hosting us tonight.
I can't think of a more important time for us to talk about the future of the country.
 Well, thank you, Jim.
And thanks to everybody.
 We haven't seen the language yet.
And I do think that there's constructive work being done out there.
So, for the viewers who are watching, I am optimistic about the capacity of us to come together with a plan.
 I -- I hope so.
And I...
 Sure.
 Sure.
But -- but let me -- let me point out, I also warned about Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and warned about corporate greed and excess, and CEO pay, and all that.
A lot of us saw this train wreck coming.
 Well, I think Senator McCain's absolutely right that we need more responsibility, but we need it not just when there's a crisis.
I mean, we've had years in which the reigning economic ideology has been what's good for Wall Street, but not what's good for Main Street.
 I do not think that they are.
 Well, the -- John, 10 days ago, you said that the fundamentals of the economy are sound.
And...
 Are you afraid I couldn't hear him?
 The -- and I just fundamentally disagree.
And unless we are holding ourselves accountable day in, day out, not just when there's a crisis for folks who have power and influence and can hire lobbyists, but for the nurse, the teacher, the police officer, who, frankly, at the end of each month, they've got a little financial crisis going on.
 No, I -- look, we've got to fix the system.
We've got fundamental problems in the system.
And Main Street is paying a penalty for the excesses and greed in Washington, D.C., and in the Wall Street.
 Well, the first thing we have to do is get spending under control in Washington.
It's completely out of control.
It's gone -- we have now presided over the largest increase in the size of government since the Great Society.
 Well, Senator McCain is absolutely right that the earmarks process has been abused, which is why I suspended any requests for my home state, whether it was for senior centers or what have you, until we cleaned it up.
 Well, again, I don't mean to go back and forth, but he...
 Senator Obama suspended those requests for pork-barrel projects after he was running for president of the United States.
He didn't happen to see that light during the first three years as a member of the United States Senate, $932 million in requests.
 I -- I don't know where John is getting his figures.
Let's just be clear.
 And when you look at your tax policies that are directed primarily at those who are doing well, and you are neglecting people who are really struggling right now, I think that is a continuation of the last eight years, and we can't afford another four.
 Well -- well, let me give you an example of what Senator Obama finds objectionable, the business tax.
 Well, let me just make a couple of points.
 My definition -- here's what I can tell the American people: 95 percent of you will get a tax cut.
And if you make less than $250,000, less than a quarter-million dollars a year, then you will not see one dime's worth of tax increase.
 Well, you know, let me just...
 I know we have to, but this is a classic example of walking the walk and talking the talk.
 John, you want to give oil companies another $4 billion.
 You've got to look at our record.
You've got to look at our records.
That's the important thing.
 That's not true, John.
That's not true.
 And that's just a fact.
Again, you can look it up.
 Look, it's just not true.
And if we want to talk about oil company profits, under your tax plan, John -- this is undeniable -- oil companies would get an additional $4 billion in tax breaks.
 With all due respect, you already gave them to the oil companies.
 No, but, John, the fact of the matter is, is that I was opposed to those tax breaks, tried to strip them out.
We've got an energy bill on the Senate floor right now that contains some good stuff, some stuff you want, including drilling off-shore, but you're opposed to it because it would strip away those tax breaks that have gone to oil companies.
 Well, there are a range of things that are probably going to have to be delayed.
We don't yet know what our tax revenues are going to be.
The economy is slowing down, so it's hard to anticipate right now what the budget is going to look like next year.
 Look, we, no matter what, we've got to cut spending.
We have -- as I said, we've let government get completely out of control.
 I saved the taxpayers $6.8 billion by fighting a contract that was negotiated between Boeing and DOD that was completely wrong.
And we fixed it and we killed it and the people ended up in federal prison so I know how to do this because I've been involved these issues for many, many years.
But I think that we have to examine every agency of government and find out those that are doing their job and keep them and find out those that aren't and eliminate them and we'll have to scrub every agency of government.
 No.
As I said before, Jim, there are going to be things that end up having to be ...
 ... deferred and delayed.
Well, look, I want to make sure that we are investing in energy in order to free ourselves from the dependence on foreign oil.
That is a big project.
That is a multi-year project.
 Not willing to give up the need to do it but there may be individual components that we can't do.
But John is right we have to make cuts.
We right now give $15 billion every year as subsidies to private insurers under the Medicare system.
Doesn't work any better through the private insurers.
They just skim off $15 billion.
That was a give away and part of the reason is because lobbyists are able to shape how Medicare works.
 How about a spending freeze on everything but defense, veteran affairs and entitlement programs.
 I think we ought to seriously consider with the exceptions of caring for our veterans national defense and several other vital issues.
 The problem with a spending freeze is you're using a hatchet where you need a scalpel.
There are some programs that are very important that are under funded.
I went to increase early childhood education and the notion that we should freeze that when there may be, for example, this Medicare subsidy, I think, doesn't make sense.
 Look, we are sending $700 billion a year overseas to countries that don't like us very much.
Some of that money ends up in the hands of terrorist organizations.
We have to have wind, tide, solar, natural gas, flex fuel cars and all that but we also have to have offshore drilling and we also have to have nuclear power.
 There's no doubt its gonna affect our budgets.
There is no doubt about it.
Not only -- Even if we get all $700 billion back, let's assume the markets recover, we're holding assets long enough that eventually taxpayers get it back and that happened during the Great Depression when Roosevelt purchased a whole bunch of homes, over time, home values went back up and in fact government made a profit.
If we're lucky and we do it right, that could potentially happen but in the short term there's an outlay and we may not see that money for a while.
 Well, I want to make sure we're not handing the health care system over to the federal government which is basically what would ultimately happen with Senator Obama's health care plan.
I want the families to make decisions between themselves and their doctors.
Not the federal government.
Look.
We have to obviously cut spending.
I have fought to cut spending.
Senator Obama has $800 billion in new spending programs.
I would suggest he start by canceling some of those new spending program that he has.
 I just want to make this point, Jim.
John, it's been your president who you said you agreed with 90 percent of the time who presided over this increase in spending.
This orgy of spending and enormous deficits you voted for almost all of his budgets.
So to stand here and after eight years and say that you're going to lead on controlling spending and, you know, balancing our tax cuts so that they help middle class families when over the last eight years that hasn't happened I think just is, you know, kind of hard to swallow.
 It's well-known that I have not been elected Miss Congeniality in the United States Senate nor with the administration.
I have opposed the president on spending, on climate change, on torture of prisoner, on - on Guantanamo Bay.
On a -- on the way that the Iraq War was conducted.
I have a long record and the American people know me very well and that is independent and a maverick of the Senate and I'm happy to say that I've got a partner that's a good maverick along with me now.
 I think the lessons of Iraq are very clear that you cannot have a failed strategy that will then cause you to nearly lose a conflict.
Our initial military success, we went in to Baghdad and everybody celebrated.
And then the war was very badly mishandled.
I went to Iraq in 2003 and came back and said, we've got to change this strategy.
This strategy requires additional troops, it requires a fundamental change in strategy and I fought for it.
And finally, we came up with a great general and a strategy that has succeeded.
 And I want to tell you that now that we will succeed and our troops will come home, and not in defeat, that we will see a stable ally in the region and a fledgling democracy.
 Well, this is an area where Senator McCain and I have a fundamental difference because I think the first question is whether we should have gone into the war in the first place.
 The next president of the United States is not going to have to address the issue as to whether we went into Iraq or not.
The next president of the United States is going to have to decide how we leave, when we leave, and what we leave behind.
That's the decision of the next president of the United States.
 Senator Obama is the chairperson of a committee that oversights NATO that's in Afghanistan.
To this day, he has never had a hearing.
 I mean, it's remarkable.
 Which point?
He raised a whole bunch of them.
 Look, I'm very proud of my vice presidential selection, Joe Biden, who is the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and as he explains, and as John well knows, the issues of Afghanistan, the issues of Iraq, critical issues like that, don't go through my subcommittee because they're done as a committee as a whole.
 ... of judgment, of whether or not -- of whether or not -- if the question is who is best-equipped as the next president to make good decisions about how we use our military, how we make sure that we are prepared and ready for the next conflict, then I think we can take a look at our judgment.
 I'm afraid Senator Obama doesn't understand the difference between a tactic and a strategy.
But the important -- I'd like to tell you, two Fourths of July ago I was in Baghdad.
General Petraeus invited Senator Lindsey Graham and me to attend a ceremony where 688 brave young Americans, whose enlistment had expired, were reenlisting to stay and fight for Iraqi freedom and American freedom.
 That's not true.
 They just passed an electoral...
 That's not true.
 An election law just in the last few days.
There is social, economic progress, and a strategy, a strategy of going into an area, clearing and holding, and the people of the country then become allied with you.
They inform on the bad guys.
And peace comes to the country, and prosperity.
 Jim, Jim, this is a big...
 It was a strategy.
And that same strategy will be employed in Afghanistan by this great general.
And Senator Obama, who after promising not to vote to cut off funds for the troops, did the incredible thing of voting to cut off the funds for the troops in Iraq and Afghanistan.
 Jim, there are a whole bunch of things we have got to answer.
First of all, let's talk about this troop funding issue because John always brings this up.
Senator McCain cut -- Senator McCain opposed funding for troops in legislation that had a timetable, because he didn't believe in a timetable.
 Admiral Mullen suggests that Senator Obama's plan is dangerous for America.
 That's not the case.
 That's what ...
 What he said was a precipitous...
 That's what Admiral Mullen said.
 ... withdrawal would be dangerous.
He did not say that.
That's not true.
 And also General Petraeus said the same thing.
Osama bin Laden and General Petraeus have one thing in common that I know of, they both said that Iraq is the central battleground.
 It didn't exceed beyond mine, because I know that that's a strategy that has worked and can succeed.
But if we snatch defeat from the jaws of victory and adopt Senator Obama's plan, then we will have a wider war and it will make things more complicated throughout the region, including in Afghanistan.
 Yes, I think we need more troops.
I've been saying that for over a year now.
 First of all, I won't repeat the mistake that I regret enormously, and that is, after we were able to help the Afghan freedom fighters and drive the Russians out of Afghanistan, we basically washed our hands of the region.
 Nobody talked about attacking Pakistan.
Here's what I said.
 I -- I don't think that Senator Obama understands that there was a failed state in Pakistan when Musharraf came to power.
Everybody who was around then, and had been there, and knew about it knew that it was a failed state.
 A war that I was in, where we had an Army, that it wasn't through any fault of their own, but they were defeated.
And I know how hard it is for that -- for an Army and a military to recover from that.
And it did and we will win this one and we won't come home in defeat and dishonor and probably have to go back if we fail.
 Jim, let me just make a point.
I've got a bracelet, too, from Sergeant - from the mother of Sergeant Ryan David Jopeck (ph), given to me in green bay.
She asked me, can you please make sure another mother is not going through what I'm going through.
 You might think that with that kind of concern that Senator Obama would have gone to Afghanistan, particularly given his responsibilities as a subcommittee chairman.
By the way, when I'm subcommittee chairman, we take up the issues under my subcommittee.
But the important thing is -- the important thing is I visited Afghanistan and I traveled to Waziristan and I traveled to these places and I know what our security requirements are.
I know what our needs are.
So the point is that we will prevail in Afghanistan, but we need the new strategy and we need it to succeed.
 A testimony to you, Jim.
 My reading of the threat from Iran is that if Iran acquires nuclear weapons, it is an existential threat to the State of Israel and it is a threat to other countries in the region because the other countries in the region will feel compelling requirement to acquire nuclear weapons as well.
 Well, let me just correct something very quickly.
I believe the Republican Guard of Iran is a terrorist organization.
I've consistently said so.
What Senator McCain refers to is a measure in the Senate that would try to broaden the mandate inside of Iraq.
To deal with Iran.
 Senator Obama twice said in debates he would sit down with Ahmadinejad, Chavez and Raul Castro without precondition.
Without precondition.
Here is Ahmadinenene (ph), Ahmadinejad, who is, Ahmadinejad, who is now in New York, talking about the extermination of the State of Israel, of wiping Israel off the map, and we're going to sit down, without precondition, across the table, to legitimize and give a propaganda platform to a person that is espousing the extermination of the state of Israel, and therefore then giving them more credence in the world arena and therefore saying, they've probably been doing the right thing, because you will sit down across the table from them and that will legitimize their illegal behavior.
 So let's talk about this.
First of all, Ahmadinejad is not the most powerful person in Iran.
So he may not be the right person to talk to.
But I reserve the right, as president of the United States to meet with anybody at a time and place of my choosing if I think it's going to keep America safe.
 Senator McCain mentioned Henry Kissinger, who's one of his advisers, who, along with five recent secretaries of state, just said that we should meet with Iran -- guess what -- without precondition.
This is one of your own advisers.
 Of course.
 If we can't meet with our friends, I don't know how we're going to lead the world in terms of dealing with critical issues like terrorism.
 I'm not going to set the White House visitors schedule before I'm president of the United States.
I don't even have a seal yet.
 Of course not.
 He said that there could be secretary-level and lower level meetings.
I've always encouraged them.
The Iranians have met with Ambassador Crocker in Baghdad.
 Look, I mean, Senator McCain keeps on using this example that suddenly the president would just meet with somebody without doing any preparation, without having low-level talks.
Nobody's been talking about that, and Senator McCain knows it.
This is a mischaracterization of my position.
 So let me get this right.
We sit down with Ahmadinejad, and he says, "We're going to wipe Israel off the face of the Earth," and we say, "No, you're not"?
Oh, please.
 No, let me tell...
 By the way, my friend, Dr. Kissinger, who's been my friend for 35 years, would be interested to hear this conversation and Senator Obama's depiction of his -- of his positions on the issue.
I've known him for 35 years.
 We will take a look.
 And I guarantee you he would not -- he would not say that presidential top level.
 Nobody's talking about that.
 Of course he encourages and other people encourage contacts, and negotiations, and all other things.
We do that all the time.
 And Senator Obama is parsing words when he says precondition means preparation.
 I am not parsing words.
 He's parsing words, my friends.
 I'm using the same words that your advisers use.
 Well, I think that, given what's happened over the last several weeks and months, our entire Russian approach has to be evaluated, because a resurgent and very aggressive Russia is a threat to the peace and stability of the region.
 Well, I was interested in Senator Obama's reaction to the Russian aggression against Georgia.
His first statement was, "Both sides ought to show restraint."
 And they showed solidarity with them, but, also, they are very concerned about the Russian threats to regain their status of the old Russian to regain their status of the old Russian empire.
 No, actually, I think Senator McCain and I agree for the most part on these issues.
Obviously, I disagree with this notion that somehow we did not forcefully object to Russians going into Georgia.
 No one from Arizona is against solar.
And Senator Obama says he's for nuclear, but he's against reprocessing and he's against storing.
So...
 That's just not true, John.
John, I'm sorry, but that's not true.
 ... it's hard to get there from here.
And off-shore drilling is also something that is very important and it is a bridge.
 I just have to respond very quickly, just to correct -- just to correct the record.
 So I want to say that, with the Nunn-Lugar thing...
 John?
 ...
I supported Nunn-Lugar back in the early 1990s when a lot of my colleagues didn't.
That was the key legislation at the time and put us on the road to eliminating this issue of nuclear waste and the nuclear fuel that has to be taken care of.
 I -- I just have to correct the record here.
I have never said that I object to nuclear waste.
What I've said is that we have to store it safely.
 I've got to make this point, Jim.
 He objects...
 I have voted for alternate fuel all of my time...
 He -- he -- he objects...
 He objected...
 No one can be opposed to alternate energy.
 All right, fair enough.
Let's move on.
You've got one more energy -- you've got one more question.
 I think it's much less than it was the day after 9/11.
I think it -- that we have a safer nation, but we are a long way from safe.
 Well, first of all, I think that we are safer in some ways.
Obviously, we've poured billions of dollars into airport security.
We have done some work in terms of securing potential targets, but we still have a long way to go.
 And this is the greatest country on Earth.
But because of some of the mistakes that have been made -- and I give Senator McCain great credit on the torture issue, for having identified that as something that undermines our long-term security -- because of those things, we, I think, are going to have a lot of work to do in the next administration to restore that sense that America is that shining beacon on a hill.
 But in the case of missile defense, Senator Obama said it had to be, quote, "proven."
That wasn't proven when Ronald Reagan said we would do SDI, which is missile defense.
And it was major -- a major factor in bringing about the end of the Cold War.
 Oh, there's no doubt.
Look, over the last eight years, this administration, along with Senator McCain, have been solely focused on Iraq.
That has been their priority.
That has been where all our resources have gone.
 I've been involved, as I mentioned to you before, in virtually every major national security challenge we've faced in the last 20-some years.
There are some advantages to experience, and knowledge, and judgment.
 Well, let me just make a closing point.
You know, my father came from Kenya.
That's where I get my name.
 Jim, when I came home from prison, I saw our veterans being very badly treated, and it made me sad.
And I embarked on an effort to resolve the POW-MIA issue, which we did in a bipartisan fashion, and then I worked on normalization of relations between our two countries so that our veterans could come all the way home.
 Well, thank you very much, Jim, and thanks to the commission and the University of Mississippi, Ole Miss, for hosting us tonight.
I can't think of a more important time for us to talk about the future of the country.
 Well, thank you, Jim.
And thanks to everybody.
 We haven't seen the language yet.
And I do think that there's constructive work being done out there.
So, for the viewers who are watching, I am optimistic about the capacity of us to come together with a plan.
 I -- I hope so.
And I...
 Sure.
 Sure.
But -- but let me -- let me point out, I also warned about Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and warned about corporate greed and excess, and CEO pay, and all that.
A lot of us saw this train wreck coming.
 Well, I think Senator McCain's absolutely right that we need more responsibility, but we need it not just when there's a crisis.
I mean, we've had years in which the reigning economic ideology has been what's good for Wall Street, but not what's good for Main Street.
 I do not think that they are.
 Well, the -- John, 10 days ago, you said that the fundamentals of the economy are sound.
And...
 Are you afraid I couldn't hear him?
 The -- and I just fundamentally disagree.
And unless we are holding ourselves accountable day in, day out, not just when there's a crisis for folks who have power and influence and can hire lobbyists, but for the nurse, the teacher, the police officer, who, frankly, at the end of each month, they've got a little financial crisis going on.
 No, I -- look, we've got to fix the system.
We've got fundamental problems in the system.
And Main Street is paying a penalty for the excesses and greed in Washington, D.C., and in the Wall Street.
 Well, the first thing we have to do is get spending under control in Washington.
It's completely out of control.
It's gone -- we have now presided over the largest increase in the size of government since the Great Society.
 Well, Senator McCain is absolutely right that the earmarks process has been abused, which is why I suspended any requests for my home state, whether it was for senior centers or what have you, until we cleaned it up.
 Well, again, I don't mean to go back and forth, but he...
 Senator Obama suspended those requests for pork-barrel projects after he was running for president of the United States.
He didn't happen to see that light during the first three years as a member of the United States Senate, $932 million in requests.
 I -- I don't know where John is getting his figures.
Let's just be clear.
 And when you look at your tax policies that are directed primarily at those who are doing well, and you are neglecting people who are really struggling right now, I think that is a continuation of the last eight years, and we can't afford another four.
 Well -- well, let me give you an example of what Senator Obama finds objectionable, the business tax.
 Well, let me just make a couple of points.
 My definition -- here's what I can tell the American people: 95 percent of you will get a tax cut.
And if you make less than $250,000, less than a quarter-million dollars a year, then you will not see one dime's worth of tax increase.
 Well, you know, let me just...
 I know we have to, but this is a classic example of walking the walk and talking the talk.
 John, you want to give oil companies another $4 billion.
 You've got to look at our record.
You've got to look at our records.
That's the important thing.
 That's not true, John.
That's not true.
 And that's just a fact.
Again, you can look it up.
 Look, it's just not true.
And if we want to talk about oil company profits, under your tax plan, John -- this is undeniable -- oil companies would get an additional $4 billion in tax breaks.
 With all due respect, you already gave them to the oil companies.
 No, but, John, the fact of the matter is, is that I was opposed to those tax breaks, tried to strip them out.
We've got an energy bill on the Senate floor right now that contains some good stuff, some stuff you want, including drilling off-shore, but you're opposed to it because it would strip away those tax breaks that have gone to oil companies.
 Well, there are a range of things that are probably going to have to be delayed.
We don't yet know what our tax revenues are going to be.
The economy is slowing down, so it's hard to anticipate right now what the budget is going to look like next year.
 Look, we, no matter what, we've got to cut spending.
We have -- as I said, we've let government get completely out of control.
 I saved the taxpayers $6.8 billion by fighting a contract that was negotiated between Boeing and DOD that was completely wrong.
And we fixed it and we killed it and the people ended up in federal prison so I know how to do this because I've been involved these issues for many, many years.
But I think that we have to examine every agency of government and find out those that are doing their job and keep them and find out those that aren't and eliminate them and we'll have to scrub every agency of government.
 No.
As I said before, Jim, there are going to be things that end up having to be ...
 ... deferred and delayed.
Well, look, I want to make sure that we are investing in energy in order to free ourselves from the dependence on foreign oil.
That is a big project.
That is a multi-year project.
 Not willing to give up the need to do it but there may be individual components that we can't do.
But John is right we have to make cuts.
We right now give $15 billion every year as subsidies to private insurers under the Medicare system.
Doesn't work any better through the private insurers.
They just skim off $15 billion.
That was a give away and part of the reason is because lobbyists are able to shape how Medicare works.
 How about a spending freeze on everything but defense, veteran affairs and entitlement programs.
 I think we ought to seriously consider with the exceptions of caring for our veterans national defense and several other vital issues.
 The problem with a spending freeze is you're using a hatchet where you need a scalpel.
There are some programs that are very important that are under funded.
I went to increase early childhood education and the notion that we should freeze that when there may be, for example, this Medicare subsidy, I think, doesn't make sense.
 Look, we are sending $700 billion a year overseas to countries that don't like us very much.
Some of that money ends up in the hands of terrorist organizations.
We have to have wind, tide, solar, natural gas, flex fuel cars and all that but we also have to have offshore drilling and we also have to have nuclear power.
 There's no doubt its gonna affect our budgets.
There is no doubt about it.
Not only -- Even if we get all $700 billion back, let's assume the markets recover, we're holding assets long enough that eventually taxpayers get it back and that happened during the Great Depression when Roosevelt purchased a whole bunch of homes, over time, home values went back up and in fact government made a profit.
If we're lucky and we do it right, that could potentially happen but in the short term there's an outlay and we may not see that money for a while.
 Well, I want to make sure we're not handing the health care system over to the federal government which is basically what would ultimately happen with Senator Obama's health care plan.
I want the families to make decisions between themselves and their doctors.
Not the federal government.
Look.
We have to obviously cut spending.
I have fought to cut spending.
Senator Obama has $800 billion in new spending programs.
I would suggest he start by canceling some of those new spending program that he has.
 I just want to make this point, Jim.
John, it's been your president who you said you agreed with 90 percent of the time who presided over this increase in spending.
This orgy of spending and enormous deficits you voted for almost all of his budgets.
So to stand here and after eight years and say that you're going to lead on controlling spending and, you know, balancing our tax cuts so that they help middle class families when over the last eight years that hasn't happened I think just is, you know, kind of hard to swallow.
 It's well-known that I have not been elected Miss Congeniality in the United States Senate nor with the administration.
I have opposed the president on spending, on climate change, on torture of prisoner, on - on Guantanamo Bay.
On a -- on the way that the Iraq War was conducted.
I have a long record and the American people know me very well and that is independent and a maverick of the Senate and I'm happy to say that I've got a partner that's a good maverick along with me now.
 I think the lessons of Iraq are very clear that you cannot have a failed strategy that will then cause you to nearly lose a conflict.
Our initial military success, we went in to Baghdad and everybody celebrated.
And then the war was very badly mishandled.
I went to Iraq in 2003 and came back and said, we've got to change this strategy.
This strategy requires additional troops, it requires a fundamental change in strategy and I fought for it.
And finally, we came up with a great general and a strategy that has succeeded.
 And I want to tell you that now that we will succeed and our troops will come home, and not in defeat, that we will see a stable ally in the region and a fledgling democracy.
 Well, this is an area where Senator McCain and I have a fundamental difference because I think the first question is whether we should have gone into the war in the first place.
 The next president of the United States is not going to have to address the issue as to whether we went into Iraq or not.
The next president of the United States is going to have to decide how we leave, when we leave, and what we leave behind.
That's the decision of the next president of the United States.
 Senator Obama is the chairperson of a committee that oversights NATO that's in Afghanistan.
To this day, he has never had a hearing.
 I mean, it's remarkable.
 Which point?
He raised a whole bunch of them.
 Look, I'm very proud of my vice presidential selection, Joe Biden, who is the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and as he explains, and as John well knows, the issues of Afghanistan, the issues of Iraq, critical issues like that, don't go through my subcommittee because they're done as a committee as a whole.
 ... of judgment, of whether or not -- of whether or not -- if the question is who is best-equipped as the next president to make good decisions about how we use our military, how we make sure that we are prepared and ready for the next conflict, then I think we can take a look at our judgment.
 I'm afraid Senator Obama doesn't understand the difference between a tactic and a strategy.
But the important -- I'd like to tell you, two Fourths of July ago I was in Baghdad.
General Petraeus invited Senator Lindsey Graham and me to attend a ceremony where 688 brave young Americans, whose enlistment had expired, were reenlisting to stay and fight for Iraqi freedom and American freedom.
 That's not true.
 They just passed an electoral...
 That's not true.
 An election law just in the last few days.
There is social, economic progress, and a strategy, a strategy of going into an area, clearing and holding, and the people of the country then become allied with you.
They inform on the bad guys.
And peace comes to the country, and prosperity.
 Jim, Jim, this is a big...
 It was a strategy.
And that same strategy will be employed in Afghanistan by this great general.
And Senator Obama, who after promising not to vote to cut off funds for the troops, did the incredible thing of voting to cut off the funds for the troops in Iraq and Afghanistan.
 Jim, there are a whole bunch of things we have got to answer.
First of all, let's talk about this troop funding issue because John always brings this up.
Senator McCain cut -- Senator McCain opposed funding for troops in legislation that had a timetable, because he didn't believe in a timetable.
 Admiral Mullen suggests that Senator Obama's plan is dangerous for America.
 That's not the case.
 That's what ...
 What he said was a precipitous...
 That's what Admiral Mullen said.
 ... withdrawal would be dangerous.
He did not say that.
That's not true.
 And also General Petraeus said the same thing.
Osama bin Laden and General Petraeus have one thing in common that I know of, they both said that Iraq is the central battleground.
 It didn't exceed beyond mine, because I know that that's a strategy that has worked and can succeed.
But if we snatch defeat from the jaws of victory and adopt Senator Obama's plan, then we will have a wider war and it will make things more complicated throughout the region, including in Afghanistan.
 Yes, I think we need more troops.
I've been saying that for over a year now.
 First of all, I won't repeat the mistake that I regret enormously, and that is, after we were able to help the Afghan freedom fighters and drive the Russians out of Afghanistan, we basically washed our hands of the region.
 Nobody talked about attacking Pakistan.
Here's what I said.
 I -- I don't think that Senator Obama understands that there was a failed state in Pakistan when Musharraf came to power.
Everybody who was around then, and had been there, and knew about it knew that it was a failed state.
 A war that I was in, where we had an Army, that it wasn't through any fault of their own, but they were defeated.
And I know how hard it is for that -- for an Army and a military to recover from that.
And it did and we will win this one and we won't come home in defeat and dishonor and probably have to go back if we fail.
 Jim, let me just make a point.
I've got a bracelet, too, from Sergeant - from the mother of Sergeant Ryan David Jopeck (ph), given to me in green bay.
She asked me, can you please make sure another mother is not going through what I'm going through.
 You might think that with that kind of concern that Senator Obama would have gone to Afghanistan, particularly given his responsibilities as a subcommittee chairman.
By the way, when I'm subcommittee chairman, we take up the issues under my subcommittee.
But the important thing is -- the important thing is I visited Afghanistan and I traveled to Waziristan and I traveled to these places and I know what our security requirements are.
I know what our needs are.
So the point is that we will prevail in Afghanistan, but we need the new strategy and we need it to succeed.
 A testimony to you, Jim.
 My reading of the threat from Iran is that if Iran acquires nuclear weapons, it is an existential threat to the State of Israel and it is a threat to other countries in the region because the other countries in the region will feel compelling requirement to acquire nuclear weapons as well.
 Well, let me just correct something very quickly.
I believe the Republican Guard of Iran is a terrorist organization.
I've consistently said so.
What Senator McCain refers to is a measure in the Senate that would try to broaden the mandate inside of Iraq.
To deal with Iran.
 Senator Obama twice said in debates he would sit down with Ahmadinejad, Chavez and Raul Castro without precondition.
Without precondition.
Here is Ahmadinenene (ph), Ahmadinejad, who is, Ahmadinejad, who is now in New York, talking about the extermination of the State of Israel, of wiping Israel off the map, and we're going to sit down, without precondition, across the table, to legitimize and give a propaganda platform to a person that is espousing the extermination of the state of Israel, and therefore then giving them more credence in the world arena and therefore saying, they've probably been doing the right thing, because you will sit down across the table from them and that will legitimize their illegal behavior.
 So let's talk about this.
First of all, Ahmadinejad is not the most powerful person in Iran.
So he may not be the right person to talk to.
But I reserve the right, as president of the United States to meet with anybody at a time and place of my choosing if I think it's going to keep America safe.
 Senator McCain mentioned Henry Kissinger, who's one of his advisers, who, along with five recent secretaries of state, just said that we should meet with Iran -- guess what -- without precondition.
This is one of your own advisers.
 Of course.
 If we can't meet with our friends, I don't know how we're going to lead the world in terms of dealing with critical issues like terrorism.
 I'm not going to set the White House visitors schedule before I'm president of the United States.
I don't even have a seal yet.
 Of course not.
 He said that there could be secretary-level and lower level meetings.
I've always encouraged them.
The Iranians have met with Ambassador Crocker in Baghdad.
 Look, I mean, Senator McCain keeps on using this example that suddenly the president would just meet with somebody without doing any preparation, without having low-level talks.
Nobody's been talking about that, and Senator McCain knows it.
This is a mischaracterization of my position.
 So let me get this right.
We sit down with Ahmadinejad, and he says, "We're going to wipe Israel off the face of the Earth," and we say, "No, you're not"?
Oh, please.
 No, let me tell...
 By the way, my friend, Dr. Kissinger, who's been my friend for 35 years, would be interested to hear this conversation and Senator Obama's depiction of his -- of his positions on the issue.
I've known him for 35 years.
 We will take a look.
 And I guarantee you he would not -- he would not say that presidential top level.
 Nobody's talking about that.
 Of course he encourages and other people encourage contacts, and negotiations, and all other things.
We do that all the time.
 And Senator Obama is parsing words when he says precondition means preparation.
 I am not parsing words.
 He's parsing words, my friends.
 I'm using the same words that your advisers use.
 Well, I think that, given what's happened over the last several weeks and months, our entire Russian approach has to be evaluated, because a resurgent and very aggressive Russia is a threat to the peace and stability of the region.
 Well, I was interested in Senator Obama's reaction to the Russian aggression against Georgia.
His first statement was, "Both sides ought to show restraint."
 And they showed solidarity with them, but, also, they are very concerned about the Russian threats to regain their status of the old Russian to regain their status of the old Russian empire.
 No, actually, I think Senator McCain and I agree for the most part on these issues.
Obviously, I disagree with this notion that somehow we did not forcefully object to Russians going into Georgia.
 No one from Arizona is against solar.
And Senator Obama says he's for nuclear, but he's against reprocessing and he's against storing.
So...
 That's just not true, John.
John, I'm sorry, but that's not true.
 ... it's hard to get there from here.
And off-shore drilling is also something that is very important and it is a bridge.
 I just have to respond very quickly, just to correct -- just to correct the record.
 So I want to say that, with the Nunn-Lugar thing...
 John?
 ...
I supported Nunn-Lugar back in the early 1990s when a lot of my colleagues didn't.
That was the key legislation at the time and put us on the road to eliminating this issue of nuclear waste and the nuclear fuel that has to be taken care of.
 I -- I just have to correct the record here.
I have never said that I object to nuclear waste.
What I've said is that we have to store it safely.
 I've got to make this point, Jim.
 He objects...
 I have voted for alternate fuel all of my time...
 He -- he -- he objects...
 He objected...
 No one can be opposed to alternate energy.
 All right, fair enough.
Let's move on.
You've got one more energy -- you've got one more question.
 I think it's much less than it was the day after 9/11.
I think it -- that we have a safer nation, but we are a long way from safe.
 Well, first of all, I think that we are safer in some ways.
Obviously, we've poured billions of dollars into airport security.
We have done some work in terms of securing potential targets, but we still have a long way to go.
 And this is the greatest country on Earth.
But because of some of the mistakes that have been made -- and I give Senator McCain great credit on the torture issue, for having identified that as something that undermines our long-term security -- because of those things, we, I think, are going to have a lot of work to do in the next administration to restore that sense that America is that shining beacon on a hill.
 But in the case of missile defense, Senator Obama said it had to be, quote, "proven."
That wasn't proven when Ronald Reagan said we would do SDI, which is missile defense.
And it was major -- a major factor in bringing about the end of the Cold War.
 Oh, there's no doubt.
Look, over the last eight years, this administration, along with Senator McCain, have been solely focused on Iraq.
That has been their priority.
That has been where all our resources have gone.
 I've been involved, as I mentioned to you before, in virtually every major national security challenge we've faced in the last 20-some years.
There are some advantages to experience, and knowledge, and judgment.
 Well, let me just make a closing point.
You know, my father came from Kenya.
That's where I get my name.
 Jim, when I came home from prison, I saw our veterans being very badly treated, and it made me sad.
And I embarked on an effort to resolve the POW-MIA issue, which we did in a bipartisan fashion, and then I worked on normalization of relations between our two countries so that our veterans could come all the way home.
 Well, thank you very much, Jim, for this opportunity.
I want to thank Governor Romney and the University of Denver for your hospitality.
 Thank you, Jim.
It's an honor to be here with you, and I appreciate the chance to be with the president.
I'm pleased to be at the University of Denver, appreciate their welcome, and also the Presidential Commission on these debates.
 Now, I'm concerned that the path that we're on has just been unsuccessful.
The president has a view very similar to the view he had when he ran four years, that a bigger government, spending more, taxing more, regulating more -- if you will, trickle-down government -- would work.
 Well, let me talk specifically about what I think we need to do.
First, we've got to improve our education system and we've made enormous progress drawing on ideas both from Democrats and Republicans that are already starting to show gains in some of the toughest to deal with schools.
We've got a program called Race to the Top that has prompted reforms in 46 states around the country, raising standards, improving how we train teachers.
 So all of this is possible.
Now, in order for us to do it, we do have to close our deficit, and one of the things I'm sure we'll be discussing tonight is, how do we deal with our tax code?
And how do we make sure that we are reducing spending in a responsible way, but also, how do we have enough revenue to make those investments?
 Well, sure.
I'd like to clear up the record and go through it piece by piece.
 And so the question is how to get them going again.
And I've described it.
It's energy and trade, the right kind of training programs, balancing our budget and helping small business.
Those are the -- the cornerstones of my plan.
 Well, I think -- let's talk about taxes, because I think it's instructive.
Now, four years ago, when I stood on this stage, I said that I would cut taxes for middle-class families.
And that's exactly what I did.
We cut taxes for middle-class families by about $3,600.
 When you add up all the loopholes and deductions that upper-income individuals can -- are currently taking advantage of, you take those all away, you don't come close to paying for $5 trillion in tax cuts and $2 trillion in additional military spending.
 And that's why independent studies looking at this said the only way to meet Governor Romney's pledge of not reducing the deficit or -- or -- or not adding to the deficit is by burdening middle-class families.
The average middle-class family with children would pay about $2,000 more.
 Well, but -- but virtually -- virtually everything he just said about my tax plan is inaccurate.
 So if the tax plan he described were a tax plan I was asked to support, I'd say absolutely not.
I'm not looking for a $5 trillion tax cut.
What I've said is I won't put in place a tax cut that adds to the deficit.
That's part one.
So there's no economist that can say Mitt Romney's tax plan adds $5 trillion if I say I will not add to the deficit with my tax plan.
 And the reason is because small business pays that individual rate; 54 percent of America's workers work in businesses that are taxed not at the corporate tax rate, but at the individual tax rate.
And if we lower that rate, they will be able to hire more people.
For me, this is about jobs.
This is about getting jobs for the American people.
 Well, for 18 months he's been running on this tax plan.
And now, five weeks before the election, he's saying that his big, bold idea is, "Never mind."
 And we do have a difference, though, when it comes to definitions of small business.
Under -- under my plan, 97 percent of small businesses would not see their income taxes go up.
Governor Romney says, well, those top 3 percent, they're the job creators, they'd be burdened.
 Jim, let me just come back on that -- on that point, which is these...
 ... the small businesses we're talking about...
 It's fun, isn't it?
 You bet.
Well, President, you're -- Mr. President, you're absolutely right, which is that, with regards to 97 percent of the businesses are not -- not taxed at the 35 percent tax rate, they're taxed at a lower rate.
But those businesses that are in the last 3 percent of businesses happen to employ half -- half of all the people who work in small business.
Those are the businesses that employ one-quarter of all the workers in America.
And your plan is to take their tax rate from 35 percent to 40 percent.
 Jim, I -- you may want to move onto another topic, but I -- I would just say this to the American people.
If you believe that we can cut taxes by $5 trillion and add $2 trillion in additional spending that the military is not asking for, $7 trillion -- just to give you a sense, over 10 years, that's more than our entire defense budget -- and you think that by closing loopholes and deductions for the well-to-do, somehow you will not end up picking up the tab, then Governor Romney's plan may work for you.
 Bill Clinton tried the approach that I'm talking about.
We created 23 million new jobs.
We went from deficit to surplus.
And businesses did very well.
So, in some ways, we've got some data on which approach is more likely to create jobs and opportunity for Americans and I believe that the economy works best when middle-class families are getting tax breaks so that they've got some money in their pockets, and those of us who have done extraordinarily well because of this magnificent country that we live in, that we can afford to do a little bit more to make sure we're not blowing up the deficit.
 Jim, the president began this segment, so I think I get the last word.
 All right.
Well, but he gets the first word of that segment.
I get the last word (inaudible) I hope.
Let me just make this comment.
 I think first of all, let me -- let me repeat -- let me repeat what I said.
I'm not in favor of a $5 trillion tax cut.
That's not my plan.
My plan is not to put in place any tax cut that will add to the deficit.
That's point one.
 Good.
I'm glad you raised that, and it's a -- it's a critical issue.
I think it's not just an economic issue, I think it's a moral issue.
I think it's, frankly, not moral for my generation to keep spending massively more than we take in, knowing those burdens are going to be passed on to the next generation and they're going to be paying the interest and the principal all their lives.
 I like it.
 Good.
OK, good.
So I'll get rid of that.
 Number three, I'll make government more efficient and to cut back the number of employees, combine some agencies and departments.
My cutbacks will be done through attrition, by the way.
 When I walked into the Oval Office, I had more than a trillion-dollar deficit greeting me.
And we know where it came from: two wars that were paid for on a credit card; two tax cuts that were not paid for; and a whole bunch of programs that were not paid for; and then a massive economic crisis.
 ... talked about Medicaid and how we could send it back to the states, but effectively this means a 30 percent cut in the primary program we help for seniors who are in nursing homes, for kids who are with disabilities.
 And -- and that is not a right strategy for us to move forward.
 Sorry.
 Simpson-Bowles, the president should have grabbed that.
 I have my own plan.
It's not the same as Simpson- Bowles.
But in my view, the president should have grabbed it.
If you wanted to make some adjustments to it, take it, go to Congress, fight for it.
 That's what we've done, made some adjustments to it, and we're putting it forward before Congress right now, a $4 trillion plan...
 But you've been -- but you've been president four years...
 You've been president four years.
You said you'd cut the deficit in half.
It's now four years later.
We still have trillion-dollar deficits.
The CBO says we'll have a trillion-dollar deficit each of the next four years.
If you're re-elected, we'll get to a trillion-dollar debt.
 I mean, you have said before you'd cut the deficit in half.
And this -- I love this idea of $4 trillion in cuts.
You found $4 trillion of ways to reduce or to get closer to a balanced budget, except we still show trillion-dollar deficits every year.
That doesn't get the job done.
 OK.
 Well, we've had this discussion before.
 There has to be revenue in addition to cuts.
Now, Governor Romney has ruled out revenue.
He's ruled out revenue.
 Absolutely.
(CROSSTALK)
 Look, the revenue I get is by more people working, getting higher pay, paying more taxes.
That's how we get growth and how we balance the budget.
But the idea of taxing people more, putting more people out of work, you'll never get there.
You'll never balance the budget by raising taxes.
 If -- if we're serious, we've got to take a balanced, responsible approach.
And by the way, this is not just when it comes to individual taxes.
Let's talk about corporate taxes.
 It means that the teacher that I met in Las Vegas, a wonderful young lady, who describes to me -- she's got 42 kids in her class.
The first two weeks she's got them, some of them sitting on the floor until finally they get reassigned.
They're using text books that are 10 years old.
 Jim, let's -- we've gone on a lot of topics there, and so it's going to take a minute to go from Medicaid to schools...
 ... to oil, to tax breaks, then companies going overseas.
So let's go through them one by one.
 It's time to end it.
 And in one year, you provided $90 billion in breaks to the green energy world.
 But, you know, if we get that tax rate from 35 percent down to 25 percent, why that $2.8 billion is on the table.
Of course it's on the table.
That's probably not going to survive you get that rate down to 25 percent.
 But -- but the idea that you get a break for shipping jobs overseas is simply not the case.
 What we do have right now is a setting where I'd like to bring money from overseas back to this country.
 But -- but the right -- the right approach is one which relies on the brilliance of our people and states, not the federal government.
 OK.
 You know, I suspect that, on Social Security, we've got a somewhat similar position.
Social Security is structurally sound.
It's going to have to be tweaked the way it was by Ronald Reagan and Speaker -- Democratic Speaker Tip O'Neill.
But it is -- the basic structure is sound.
 So my approach is to say, how do we strengthen the system over the long term?
And in Medicare, what we did was we said, we are going to have to bring down the costs if we're going to deal with our long-term deficits, but to do that, let's look where some of the money's going.
 Well, Jim, our seniors depend on these programs, and I know anytime we talk about entitlements, people become concerned that something's going to happen that's going to change their life for the worse.
 First of all, I think it's important for Governor Romney to present this plan that he says will only affect folks in the future.
 I don't.
And let me explain why.
 Again, that's for future...
 I understand.
 ... people, right, not for current retirees.
 For -- so if you're -- if you're 54 or 55, you might want to listen 'cause this -- this will affect you.
 And then what you've got is folks like my grandmother at the mercy of the private insurance system precisely at the time when they are most in need of decent health care.
 What I support is no change for current retirees and near-retirees to Medicare.
And the president supports taking $716 billion out of that program.
 So that's -- that's number one.
 And by the way, if the government can be as efficient as the private sector and offer premiums that are as low as the private sector, people will be happy to get traditional Medicare or they'll be able to get a private plan.
 Jim, if I -- if I can just respond very quickly, first of all, every study has shown that Medicare has lower administrative costs than private insurance does, which is why seniors are generally pretty happy with it.
 ... but -- but -- but overall.
 And so...
 That's -- that's a big topic.
Can we -- can we stay on Medicare?
 Is that a -- is that a separate topic?
 I'm sorry.
 Let's get back to Medicare.
 Let's get back to Medicare.
 The president said that the government can provide the service at lower cost and without a profit.
 If that's the case, then it will always be the best product that people can purchase.
 But my experience -- my experience the private sector typically is able to provide a better product at a lower cost.
 Absolutely.
 Absolutely.
 Absolutely.
 Regulation is essential.
You can't have a free market work if you don't have regulation.
As a businessperson, I had to have -- I need to know the regulations.
I needed them there.
You couldn't have people opening up banks in their -- in their garage and making loans.
I mean, you have to have regulations so that you can have an economy work.
Every free economy has good regulation.
At the same time, regulation can become excessive.
 In some places, yes.
Other places, no.
 No, it can become out of date.
And what's happened with some of the legislation that's been passed during the president's term, you've seen regulation become excessive, and it's hurt -- it's hurt the economy.
Let me give you an example.
 Well, I would repeal and replace it.
We're not going to get rid of all regulation.
You have to have regulation.
And there are some parts of Dodd-Frank that make all the sense in the world.
You need transparency, you need to have leverage limits for...
 But let's -- let's mention -- let me mention the other one.
Let's talk...
 I think this is a great example.
The reason we have been in such a enormous economic crisis was prompted by reckless behavior across the board.
 In the meantime, by the way, we also made sure that all the help that we provided those banks was paid back every single dime, with interest.
 Sorry, but that's just not -- that's just not the facts.
Look, we have to have regulation on Wall Street.
That's why I'd have regulation.
But I wouldn't designate five banks as too big to fail and give them a blank check.
That's one of the unintended consequences of Dodd-Frank.
It wasn't thought through properly.
We need to get rid of that provision because it's killing regional and small banks.
They're getting hurt.
 I sure do.
Well, in part, it comes, again, from my experience.
You know, I was in New Hampshire.
A woman came to me and she said, look, I can't afford insurance for myself or my son.
I met a couple in Appleton, Wisconsin, and they said, we're thinking of dropping our insurance, we can't afford it.
 No, I think -- I had five seconds before you interrupted me, was ...
 Well, I did with my first statement.
 First of all, I like the way we did it in Massachusetts.
I like the fact that in my state, we had Republicans and Democrats come together and work together.
What you did instead was to push through a plan without a single Republican vote.
As a matter of fact, when Massachusetts did something quite extraordinary -- elected a Republican senator to stop Obamacare, you pushed it through anyway.
 We didn't put in place a board that can tell people ultimately what treatments they're going to receive.
We didn't also do something that I think a number of people across this country recognize, which is put -- put people in a position where they're going to lose the insurance they had and they wanted.
 Governor Romney said this has to be done on a bipartisan basis.
This was a bipartisan idea.
In fact, it was a Republican idea.
And Governor Romney at the beginning of this debate wrote and said what we did in Massachusetts could be a model for the nation.
 But the fact of the matter is that some of the prescriptions that he's offered, like letting you buy insurance across state lines, there's no indication that that somehow is going to help somebody who's got a pre-existing condition be able to finally buy insurance.
In fact, it's estimated that by repealing Obamacare, you're looking at 50 million people losing health insurance...
 ... at a time when it's vitally important.
 Well...
 Well, actually it's -- it's -- it's a lengthy description.
But, number one, preexisting conditions are covered under my plan.
Number two, young people are able to stay on their family plan.
That's already offered in the private marketplace.
You don't have to have the government mandate that for that to occur.
 In my opinion, the government is not effective in -- in bringing down the cost of almost anything.
As a matter of fact, free people and free enterprises trying to find ways to do things better are able to be more effective in bringing down the cost than the government will ever be.
 But the right answer is not to have the federal government take over health care and start mandating to the providers across America, telling a patient and a doctor what kind of treatment they can have.
 Let me just point out first of all this board that we're talking about can't make decisions about what treatments are given.
That's explicitly prohibited in the law.
But let's go back to what Governor Romney indicated, that under his plan, he would be able to cover people with preexisting conditions.
 It just reminds me of, you know, he says that he's going to close deductions and loopholes for his tax plan.
That's how it's going to be paid for, but we don't know the details.
He says that he's going to replace Dodd-Frank, Wall Street reform, but we don't know exactly which ones.
He won't tell us.
He now says he's going to replace Obamacare and ensure that all the good things that are in it are going to be in there and you don't have to worry.
 No.
I -- I have to respond to that.
 Which is -- which is my experience as a governor is if I come in and -- and lay down a piece of legislation and say, "It's my way or the highway," I don't get a lot done.
What I do is the same way that Tip O'Neill and Ronald Reagan worked together some years ago.
When Ronald Reagan ran for office, he laid out the principles that he was going to foster.
He said he was going to lower tax rates.
He said he was going to broaden the base.
You've said the same thing, you're going to simplify the tax code, broaden the base.
 Well, I definitely think there are differences.
 The first role of the federal government is to keep the American people safe.
That's its most basic function.
And as commander-in-chief, that is something that I've worked on and thought about every single day that I've been in the Oval Office.
 But as Abraham Lincoln understood, there are also some things we do better together.
So, in the middle of the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln said, let's help to finance the Transcontinental Railroad, let's start the National Academy of Sciences, let's start land grant colleges, because we want to give these gateways of opportunity for all Americans, because if all Americans are getting opportunity, we're all going to be better off.
That doesn't restrict people's freedom.
That enhances it.
 Well, first, I love great schools.
Massachusetts, our schools are ranked number one of all 50 states.
And the key to great schools, great teachers.
 First, life and liberty.
We have a responsibility to protect the lives and liberties of our people, and that means a military second to none.
I do not believe in cutting our military.
I believe in maintaining the strength of America's military.
 We know that the path we're taking is not working.
It's time for a new path.
 Well, the primary responsibility for education is -- is, of course, at the state and local level.
But the federal government also can play a very important role.
And I -- and I agree with Secretary Arne Duncan, he's -- some ideas he's put forward on Race to the Top, not all of them, but some of them I agree with and -- and congratulate him for pursuing that.
The federal government can get local and -- and state schools to do a better job.
 Well, as I've indicated, I think that it has a significant role to play.
Through our Race to the Top program, we've worked with Republican and Democratic governors to initiate major reforms, and they're having an impact right now.
 You know, this is where budgets matter, because budgets reflect choices.
So when Governor Romney indicates that he wants to cut taxes and potentially benefit folks like me and him, and to pay for it we're having to initiate significant cuts in federal support for education, that makes a difference.
 When it comes to community colleges, we are seeing great work done out there all over the country because we have the opportunity to train people for jobs that exist right now.
And one of the things I suspect Governor Romney and I probably agree on is getting businesses to work with community colleges so that they're setting up their training programs...
 Let me just finish the point.
 The -- where they're partnering so that they're designing training programs.
And people who are going through them know that there's a job waiting for them if they complete it.
That makes a big difference, but that requires some federal support.
 Mr. President, Mr. President, you're entitled as the president to your own airplane and to your own house, but not to your own facts.
All right, I'm not going to cut education funding.
I don't have any plan to cut education funding and -- and grants that go to people going to college.
I'm planning on (inaudible) to grow.
So I'm not planning on making changes there.
 You've done a great job.
 Jim, I had the great experience -- it didn't seem like it at the time -- of being elected in a state where my legislature was 87 percent Democrat.
And that meant I figured out from day one I had to get along and I had to work across the aisle to get anything done.
We drove our schools to be number one in the nation.
We cut taxes 19 times.
 We -- as president, I will sit on day one -- actually, the day after I get elected -- I'll sit down with leaders -- the Democratic leaders, as well as Republican leaders, and continue -- as we did in my state -- we met every Monday for a couple hours, talked about the issues and the challenges in the -- in the -- in our state in that case.
We have to work on a collaborative basis, not because we're going to compromise our principle, but because there's common ground.
 And Republicans and Democrats both love America.
But we need to have leadership -- leadership in Washington that will actually bring people together and get the job done and could not care less if -- if it's a Republican or a Democrat.
I've done it before.
I'll do it again.
 Well, first of all, I think Governor Romney's going to have a busy first day, because he's also going to repeal Obamacare, which will not be very popular among Democrats as you're sitting down with them.
 And so part of leadership and governing is both saying what it is that you are for, but also being willing to say no to some things.
And I've got to tell you, Governor Romney, when it comes to his own party during the course of this campaign, has not displayed that willingness to say no to some of the more extreme parts of his party.
 Well, Jim, I want to thank you, and I want to thank Governor Romney, because I think was a terrific debate, and I very much appreciate it.
And I want to thank the University of Denver.
 Thank you, Jim, and Mr. President.
And thank you for tuning in this evening.
 How are you, Donald?
 Well, thank you, Lester, and thanks to Hofstra for hosting us.
 I also want to see more companies do profit-sharing.
If you help create the profits, you should be able to share in them, not just the executives at the top.
 Thank you, Lester.
Our jobs are fleeing the country.
They're going to Mexico.
They're going to many other countries.
You look at what China is doing to our country in terms of making our product.
They're devaluing their currency, and there's nobody in our government to fight them.
And we have a very good fight.
And we have a winning fight.
Because they're using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild China, and many other countries are doing the same thing.
 We cannot let it happen.
Under my plan, I'll be reducing taxes tremendously, from 35 percent to 15 percent for companies, small and big businesses.
That's going to be a job creator like we haven't seen since Ronald Reagan.
It's going to be a beautiful thing to watch.
 Well, I think that trade is an important issue.
Of course, we are 5 percent of the world's population; we have to trade with the other 95 percent.
And we need to have smart, fair trade deals.
 Well, for one thing -- and before we start on that -- my father gave me a very small loan in 1975, and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars, with some of the greatest assets in the world, and I say that only because that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
 Secretary Clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now, because of the fact that we've created a movement.
They should have been doing this for years.
What's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is -- look, we owe $20 trillion.
We cannot do it any longer, Lester.
 Well, the first thing you do is don't let the jobs leave.
The companies are leaving.
I could name, I mean, there are thousands of them.
They're leaving, and they're leaving in bigger numbers than ever.
 Well, let's stop for a second and remember where we were eight years ago.
We had the worst financial crisis, the Great Recession, the worst since the 1930s.
That was in large part because of tax policies that slashed taxes on the wealthy, failed to invest in the middle class, took their eyes off of Wall Street, and created a perfect storm.
 That's called business, by the way.
[Interruption]
 Nine million people -- nine million people lost their jobs.
Five million people lost their homes.
And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.
 I did not.
I did not.
I do not say that.
[Interruption]
 I think science is real.
 I do not say that.
[Interruption]
 And I think it's important that we grip this and deal with it, both at home and abroad.
And here's what we can do.
We can deploy a half a billion more solar panels.
We can have enough clean energy to power every home.
We can build a new modern electric grid.
That's a lot of jobs; that's a lot of new economic activity.
 She talks about solar panels.
We invested in a solar company, our country.
That was a disaster.
They lost plenty of money on that one.
 Well, actually [Interruption]
 I will bring -- excuse me.
I will bring back jobs.
You can't bring back jobs.
 Well, actually, I have thought about this quite a bit.
 Yeah, for 30 years.
[Interruption]
 And I have -- well, not quite that long.
I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s.
I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again...
 Well, he approved NAFTA [Interruption]
 ... million new jobs, a balanced budget...
 He approved NAFTA, which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.
[Interruption]
 Incomes went up for everybody.
Manufacturing jobs went up also in the 1990s, if we're actually going to look at the facts.
 But you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or any number you want to...
 Well, I've been a senator, Donald...
 You haven't done it.
You haven't done it.
[Interruption]
 And I have been a secretary of state...
 Excuse me.
[Interruption]
 And I have done a lot...
 Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.
 Well, that's your opinion.
That is your opinion.
[Interruption]
 You go to New England, you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacture is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent.
NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this country.
 Well, that is just not accurate.
I was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out.
I wrote about that in...
 You called it the gold standard.
[Interruption]
 You called it the gold standard of trade deals.
You said it's the finest deal you've ever seen.
[Interruption]
 No.
 And then you heard what I said about it, and all of a sudden you were against it.
[Interruption]
 Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts.
The facts are -- I did say I hoped it would be a good deal, but when it was negotiated...
 Not.
[Interruption]
 ... which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn't.
I wrote about that in my book...
 So is it President Obama's fault?
[Interruption]
 ... before you even announced.
 Is it President Obama's fault?
[Interruption]
 Look, there are differences...
 Secretary, is it President Obama's fault?
[Interruption]
 There are...
 Because he's pushing it.
[Interruption]
 There are different views about what's good for our country, our economy, and our leadership in the world.
And I think it's important to look at what we need to do to get the economy going again.
That's why I said new jobs with rising incomes, investments, not in more tax cuts that would add $5 trillion to the debt.
 But you have no plan.
[Interruption]
 But in -- oh, but I do.
 Secretary, you have no plan.
[Interruption]
 In fact, I have written a book about it.
It's called "Stronger Together."
You can pick it up tomorrow at a bookstore...
 That's about all you've [Interruption]
 ... or at an airport near you.
 But it's because I see this -- we need to have strong growth, fair growth, sustained growth.
We also have to look at how we help families balance the responsibilities at home and the responsibilities at business.
 You are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history.
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history.
You are going to drive business out.
Your regulations are a disaster, and you're going to increase regulations all over the place.
[Interruption]
 That can't -- that can't be left to stand.
[Interruption]
 I kind of assumed that there would be a lot of these charges and claims, and so...
 Facts.
[Interruption]
 So we have taken the home page of my website, HillaryClinton.com, and we've turned it into a fact-checker.
So if you want to see in real-time what the facts are, please go and take a look.
Because what I have proposed...
 And take a look at mine, also, and you'll see.
[Interruption]
 ... would not add a penny to the debt, and your plans would add $5 trillion to the debt.
What I have proposed would cut regulations and streamline them for small businesses.
What I have proposed would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy, because they have made all the gains in the economy.
And I think it's time that the wealthy and corporations paid their fair share to support this country.
 Well, could I just finish -- I think I [Interruption]
 I think I should -- you go to her website, and you take a look at her website.
 She's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.
 And look at her website.
You know what?
It's no difference than this.
She's telling us how to fight ISIS.
Just go to her website.
She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website.
I don't think General Douglas MacArthur would like that too much.
 Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS.
[Interruption]
 No, no, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
[Interruption]
 No, we're not.
No, we're not.
 See, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
No wonder you've been fighting -- no wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.
[Interruption]
 That's a -- that's -- go to the -- please, fact checkers, get to work.
 Well, I'm really calling for major jobs, because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs.
They're going to expand their companies.
They're going to do a tremendous job.
 I have a feeling that by, the end of this evening, I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened.
 Why not?
[Interruption]
 Why not?
Yeah, why not?
 There's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into their country.
 Yes.
[Interruption]
 Yeah, well, let's start the clock again, Lester.
We've looked at your tax proposals.
I don't see changes in the corporate tax rates or the kinds of proposals you're referring to that would cause the repatriation, bringing back of money that's stranded overseas.
I happen to support that.
 Then you didn't read it.
[Interruption]
 I happen to -- I happen to support that in a way that will actually work to our benefit.
But when I look at what you have proposed, you have what is called now the Trump loophole, because it would so advantage you and the business you do.
You've proposed an approach that has a...
 Who gave it that name?
The first I've -- who gave it that name?
[Interruption]
 ... $4 billion tax benefit for your family.
And when you look at what you are proposing...
 How much?
How much for my family?
[Interruption] CLINTON: ... it is...
 Lester, how much?
[Interruption]
 ... as I said, trumped-up trickle-down.
Trickle-down did not work.
It got us into the mess we were in, in 2008 and 2009.
Slashing taxes on the wealthy hasn't worked.
 I don't think top-down works in America.
I think building the middle class, investing in the middle class, making college debt-free so more young people can get their education, helping people refinance their -- their debt from college at a lower rate.
Those are the kinds of things that will really boost the economy.
Broad-based, inclusive growth is what we need in America, not more advantages for people at the very top.
 Typical politician.
All talk, no action.
Sounds good, doesn't work.
Never going to happen.
Our country is suffering because people like Secretary Clinton have made such bad decisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what's going on.
[Interruption]
 I don't mind releasing -- I'm under a routine audit.
And it'll be released.
And -- as soon as the audit's finished, it will be released.
 Excuse me.
 Well, I told you, I will release them as soon as the audit.
Look, I've been under audit almost for 15 years.
I know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited.
I said, do you get audited?
I get audited almost every year.
 It's not negotiable, no.
Let her release the e-mails.
Why did she delete 33,000...
 Well, I think you've seen another example of bait-and- switch here.
For 40 years, everyone running for president has released their tax returns.
You can go and see nearly, I think, 39, 40 years of our tax returns, but everyone has done it.
We know the IRS has made clear there is no prohibition on releasing it when you're under audit.
 Third, we don't know all of his business dealings, but we have been told through investigative reporting that he owes about $650 million to Wall Street and foreign banks.
Or maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the only years that anybody's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax.
 That makes me smart.
[Interruption]
 So if he's paid zero, that means zero for troops, zero for vets, zero for schools or health.
And I think probably he's not all that enthusiastic about having the rest of our country see what the real reasons are, because it must be something really important, even terrible, that he's trying to hide.
 I do.
You know, I made a mistake using a private e- mail.
TRUMP: That's for sure.
 And if I had to do it over again, I would, obviously, do it differently.
But I'm not going to make any excuses.
It was a mistake, and I take responsibility for that.
 That was more than a mistake.
That was done purposely.
OK?
That was not a mistake.
That was done purposely.
When you have your staff taking the Fifth Amendment, taking the Fifth so they're not prosecuted, when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the Fifth, I think it's disgraceful.
And believe me, this country thinks it's -- really thinks it's disgraceful, also.
 And maybe because you haven't paid any federal income tax for a lot of years.
(APPLAUSE)
 It would be squandered, too, believe me.
 ... is if your -- if your main claim to be president of the United States is your business, then I think we should talk about that.
You know, your campaign manager said that you built a lot of businesses on the backs of little guys.
 Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work...
 Well, to...
 Which our country should do, too.
 Do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business not deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, taken the goods that they produced, and then refused to pay them?
 Wrong.
Wrong.
 Well, sometimes there's not a direct transfer of skills from business to government, but sometimes what happened in business would be really bad for government.
 And we need to be very clear about that.
 So, yeah, I think -- I do think it's time.
Look, it's all words, it's all sound bites.
I built an unbelievable company.
Some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets anywhere in the world, beyond the United States, in Europe, lots of different places.
It's an unbelievable company.
 Well, you're right.
Race remains a significant challenge in our country.
Unfortunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what kind of education in their public schools they can get, and, yes, it determines how they're treated in the criminal justice system.
We've just seen those two tragic examples in both Tulsa and Charlotte.
 Right now, that's not the case in a lot of our neighborhoods.
So I have, ever since the first day of my campaign, called for criminal justice reform.
I've laid out a platform that I think would begin to remedy some of the problems we have in the criminal justice system.
But we also have to recognize, in addition to the challenges that we face with policing, there are so many good, brave police officers who equally want reform.
So we have to bring communities together in order to begin working on that, as a mutual goal.
 First of all, Secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words.
And that's law and order.
And we need law and order.
If we don't have it, we're not going to have a country.
And when I look at what's going on in Charlotte, a city I love, city where I have investments, when I look at what's going on throughout various parts of our country -- I can just keep naming them all day long -- we need law and order in our country.
 You walk down the street, you get shot.
In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands, since January 1st.
Thousands of shootings.
And I say, where is this?
Is this a war-torn country?
What are we doing?
And we have to stop the violence, we have to bring back law and order, in a place like Chicago, where thousands of people have been killed.
Thousands, over the last number of years.
 No, you're wrong.
It went before a judge who was a very against police judge.
It was taken away from her and our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case.
They would have won an appeal.
If you look at it, throughout the country, there are many places --
 No, the argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and that are bad people that shouldnt have them.
These are felons, these are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- when you have 3,000 shootings in Chicago, from January 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns, from the beginning of the presidency of Barack Obama, his hometown, you have to have stop and frisk.
 Lester, we need law and order.
We need law and order in the inner cities.
Because the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and Hispanic people.
And it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.
 Well, I've heard Donald say this at his rallies, and it's really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country.
 [Groan]
 The vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids.
There's a lot that we should be proud of and we should be supporting and lifting up.
But we do always have to make sure we keep people safe.
 But there were some problems, some unintended consequences.
Too many young African-American and Latino men ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses, and it's just a fact that if you're a young African-American man and you do the same thing as a young white man, you are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted and incarcerated.
So we've got to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system.
 So there are some positive ways we can work on this.
And I believe strongly that common sense gun safety measures would assist us right now, and this is something Donald has supported along with the gun lobby.
Right now weve got too many military style weapons on the streets, in a lot of places our police are outgunned.
We need comprehensive background checks, and we need to keep guns out of the hands of those who will do harm.
And we finally need to pass a prohibition on anyone who's on the terrorist watchlist from being able to buy a gun in our country.
If you're too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun.
There are things we can do and we ought to do it in a bipartisan way.
 Lester, I think implicit bias is a problem for everyone, not just police.
I think unfortunately, too many of us in our great country, um, jump to conclusions about each other.
And therefore, I think we need all of us to be asking hard questions about, you know, Why am I feeling this way?
 I'd like to respond.
 First of all, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no fly lists.
I agree with you, when a person is on a watch list or a no fly list -- and I have the endorsement of the NRA, which I'm very proud of, these are very very good people, and they are protecting the Second Amendment -- but I think we have to look very strongly at no fly lists and watch lists, and when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off.
But I tend to agree with that, quite strongly.
 It's also fair to say, if we're going to talk about mayors, that under the current mayor, crime has continued to drop, including murders.
 You're wrong.
 No, I'm not.
 Murders are up.
 New York has done an excellent job.
I give credit across the board going back two mayors, two police chiefs, it has worked.
And other communities need to come together to do what will work as well.
 I'd like to responded if I might.
 Look, the African-American community has been let down by our politicians.
They talk good around election time, like right now, and after the election, they said, see ya later, I'll see you in four years.
The African-American community -- look, the community within the inner cities has been so badly treated, they've been abused and used in order to get votes by Democrat politicians, that's what it is.
They've controlled these communities for up to 100 years.
 You look at the inner cities, I just left Detroit, I just left Philadelphia.
You've seen me, I've been all over the place.
You decided to stay home and that's OK.
 I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate.
And yes, I did.
And you know what else I prepared for?
I prepared to be president.
And I think that's a good thing.
 I'll tell you, its simple to say.
Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close -- very close friend of Secretary Clinton.
And her campaign manager Patti Doyle went to -- during the campaign, her campaign against President Obama, fought very hard, and you can go look it up and you can check it out, if you look at CNN this past week, Patti Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened, Blumenthal sent McClatchy to Kenya to find out about it, they were pressing very hard.
They failed to get the birth certificate.
 I want to get on to defeating ISIS, to creating jobs.
I want to get on to having a strong border.
I want to get on to things that are very important to me, and that are very important to the country.
 Nobody was pressing it, nobody was caring much about it.
I figured you'd ask the question tonight, of course.
 Well, I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it.
He should have produced it a long time before.
I say nothing.
When you talk about healing, I think that I've developed very, very good relationships, over the last little while with the African-American community.
I think you can see that.
And I feel like they really wanted me to come to that conclusion, and I think I did a great job and a great service, not only for the country but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate.
 Well, just listen to what you heard.
And clearly, as Donald just admitted, he knew he was going to stand on this debate stage, and Lester Holt was going to be asking us questions, he tried to put the whole racist birther lie to bed.
 But remember.
Donald started his career back in 1973 being sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination.
Because he would not rent apartments in one of his developments to African-Americans, and he made sure that the people who worked for him understood that was the policy.
He actually was sued twice by the Justice Department.
So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior.
And the birther lie was a very hurtful one.
 I would love to respond.
First of all, I got to watch in preparing for this, some of your debates against Barack Obama.
You treated him with terrible disrespect, and I watched the way you talk now about how lovely everything is, and how wonderful you are -- it doesn't work that way.
You were after him, you were trying to -- you even sent out or your campaign sent out pictures of him in a certain garb, very famous pictures, I don't think you can deny that.
Just last week, your campaign manager said it was true.
So when you tried to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work.
 I'll go one step further.
In Palm Beach, Florida, tough community, a brilliant community, a wealthy community, probably the wealthiest community there is in the world, I opened a club, and really got great credit for it, no discrimination against African-Americans, against Muslims, against anybody.
And it's a tremendously successful club.
And I'm so glad I did it, and I have been given great credit for what I did.
And I'm very very proud of it.
And that's the way I feel.
That is the true way I feel.
 Well I, think cybersecurity, cyberwarfare, will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next president, because clearly we're facing at this point, two different kinds of adversaries.
There are the independent hacking groups that do it mostly for commercial reasons to try to steal information that they then can use to make money.
 We need to make it very clear, whether it's Russia, China, Iran, or anybody else, the United States has much greater capacity.
And we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private sector information or our public sector information, and we're going to have to make it clear that we don't want to use the kinds of tools that we have.
We don't want to engage in a different kind of warfare.
But we will defend the citizens of this country, and the Russians need to understand that.
I think they've been treating it as almost a probing, how far would we go?
How much would we do?
And that's why I was so, I was so shocked when Donald publicly invited Putin to hack into Americans.
That is, that is just unacceptable.
 -- have said that Donald is unfit to be the commander-in-chief.
It's comments like that that really worry people who understand the threats that we face.
 I do want to say that I was just endorsed, and more are coming next week, it will be over 200 admirals.
Many of them are here, admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country.
That just happened.
And many more are coming.
And I'm very proud of it.
In addition, I was just endorse the by ICE.
Theyve never endorsed anybody before, on immigration.
I was just endorsed by ICE.
I was just recently endorsed, 16,500 border patrol agents.
 Because look at the mess that we're in.
Look at the mess that we're in.
As far as the cyber, I agree to parts of what Secretary Clinton said, we should be better than anybody else, and perhaps we're not.
I don't think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC.
She's saying Russia, Russia, Russia.
Maybe it was.
I mean, it could be Russia, but it could also be China, but it could also be lots of other people, it also could be someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, OK?
 Now, whether that was Russia, whether that was China, whether it was another country, we don't know, because the truth is, under President Obama we've lost control of things that we used to have control over.
We came in with an Internet, we came up with the Internet.
And I think Secretary Clinton and myself would agree very much, when you look at what ISIS is doing with the Internet, they're beating us at our own game.
ISIS.
So we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare.
It is a, it is a huge problem.
 Well, I think there are a number of issues that we should be addressing.
I have put forth a plan to defeat ISIS.
It does involve going after them online.
I think we need do much more with our tech companies to prevent ISIS and their operatives from being able to use the internet, to radicalize, even direct people in our country and Europe and elsewhere, but we also have to intensify our airstrikes against ISIS and eventually support our Arab and Kurdish partners to be able to actually take out ISIS in Raqqah and their claim of being a caliphate.
 First I have to say one thing, very important.
Secretary Clinton is talking about taking out ISIS -- we will take out ISIS.
Well, President Obama and Secretary Clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of Iraq, because they got out, well they shouldn't have been in, but once they got in, the way they got out was a disaster.
And ISIS was formed.
 Or, as I've been saying for a long time, and I think you'll agree, because I said it to you once -- had we taken the oil, and we should have taken the oil, ISIS would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income.
And now they have the oil all over the place, including the oil, a lot of the oil in Libya.
Which was another one of her disasters.
 Well, I hope the fact checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard.
Donald supported the invasion of Iraq.
 Wrong.
 That is absolutely --
 Wrong.
 Proved over and over again.
 Wrong.
 He actually advocated for the actions we took in Libya and urged that Gaddafi be taken out, after actually doing some business with him one time.
But the larger point, he says this constantly, is George W. Bush made the agreement about when American troops would leave Iraq.
Not Barack Obama.
And the only way that American troops could have stayed in Iraq is to get an agreement from the then Iraqi government that would have protected our troops.
And the Iraqi government would not give that.
 And we may find out more information because he is still alive, which may prove to be an intelligence benefit.
So weve got to do everything we can to vacuum up intelligence from Europe, from the Middle East, and that means we have to work more closely with our allies, and thats something that Donald has been very dismissive of.
 I have to respond.
 The secretary said very strongly about working with, we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen.
You look at the Middle East, its a total mess.
 And number two, I said and very strongly, NATO could be obsolete, because, and I was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the New York Times, which is unusual for the New York Times to be honest, but I said they do not focus on terror.
And I was very strong.
And I said it numerous times.
And about four months ago, I read on the front page of the Wall Street Journal that NATO is opening up a major terror division, and I think that's great.
 Lester, we've covered this ground.
 No, wait a minute.
When they formed, when they formed, this is something that never should have happened.
It should never happened.
Now you're talking about taking out ISIS.
But you were there, and you were Secretary of State when it was a little infant.
Now it's in over 30 countries, and you're going to stop them?
I don't think so.
 I did not support the War in Iraq.
 That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she frankly, I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media.
Would you like to hear?
I was against the war, wait a minute.
I was against the war in Iraq.
Just so you put it out.
 It does not show that.
The record shows that I'm right.
When I did an interview with Howard Stern, very lightly, the first time anybody's asked me that, I said, very lightly, I dont know, maybe, who knows.
Essentially.
I then did an interview with Neil Cavuto, we talked about the economy, its more important.
I then spoke to Sean Hannity, which everybody refuses to call Sean Hannity.
I had numerous conversationa with Sean Hannity at Fox.
And Sean Hannity said -- and he called me the other day and I spoke to him about it and he said you were totally against the war, because he was for the war and that was before the war started.
Sean Hannity said very strongly, to me and other people, he's willing to say, but nobody wants to call him, I was against the war.
He said you used to have fights with me, because Sean was in favor of the war.
 You didn't hear what I said.
 I have better judgment than she does, theres no question about that.
I also have a much better temperament than she has, you know?
I have a much better.
She spent, let me tell you.
She spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising -- you know, they got Madison Avenue into a room, oh, temperament, let's go after.
I think my strongest asset, maybe by far is my temperament, I have a winning temperament, I know how to win.
She does not --
 Woo, okay.
 Let's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by Donald.
First, NATO.
NATO, as a military alliance has something called Article V. And basically it says this, an attack on one is an attack on all.
And do you know the only time it's ever been invoked after 9/11?
When the 28 nations NATO said that they would go to Afghanistan with us to fight terrorism.
Something that they still are doing by our side.
 That would not start a war.
 That's bad judgment.
That is not the right temperament to be commander in chief, to be taunted and the worst part --
 They were taunting us --
 The worst part of what I heard Donald say has been about nuclear weapons.
He has said repeatedly that he didn't care if other countries got nuclear weapon, Japan, South Korea even Saudi Arabia.
It has been the policy of the United States, Democrats and Republicans, to do everything we could to reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
He even said if there were nuclear war in East Asia, that's fine, you know.
 Wrong.
 Have a good time, folks.
 That's lies.
 And in fact, his cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons is so deeply troubling.
That is the number one threat we face in the world, and it becomes particularly threatening if terrorists ever get their hands on any nuclear material.
So a man who can be provoked by a tweet should not have his fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes.
As far as I think anyone with any sense about this should be concerned.
 That line is getting a little bit old, I have to say.
 It's a good one, though, well describes the problem.
 It's not an accurate one at all.
Its not an accurate one.
So, I just want to give a lot of things and just to respond.
 Alright, but its very important.
All I said is they may have to defend themselves or they have to help us out.
We're a country that owes $20 trillion.
They have to help us out.
As far as the nuclear is concerned, I agree.
It is the single greatest threat that this country has.
 Well, I have to say that, you know, for, what Secretary Clinton was saying about nuclear with Russia.
Shes very cavalier in the way she talks about various countries.
But Russia has been expanding their, they have a much newer capability than we do.
We have not been updating from the new standpoint.
I looked the other night, I was seeing B-52s, theyre old enough that your father, your grandfather could be flying them.
We are not keeping up with other countries.
I'd like everybody to end it, just get rid of it, but I would certainly not do first strike.
 And by the way, another one powerful is, the worst deal I think I've ever seen negotiated that you started, is the Iran deal.
Iran is one of their biggest trading partners.
Iran has power over North Korea.
And when they made that horrible deal with Iran, they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea and they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places, and when asked to Secretary Kerry, why didn't you do that?
Why didnt you add other things into the deal?
 Let me start by saying words matter.
Words matter when you run for president, and they really matter when you are president.
And I want to reassure our allies in Japan and South Korea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties, and we will honor them.
It is essential that America's word be good.
And so I know that this campaign has caused some questioning and some worries on the part of many leaders across the globe.
I've talked with a number of them.
But I want to, on behalf of myself, and I think on behalf of a majority of the American people say that, you know, our word is good.
 But it's like his plan to defeat ISIS.
He says it's a secret plan, but the only secret is that he has no plan.
So we need to be more precise in how we talk about these issues.
People around the world follow our presidential campaigns so closely, trying to get hints about what we will do.
Can they rely on us?
Are we going to lead the world with strength and in accordance with our values?
 -- if given any opportunities at all.
 Lester, ne thing I'd like to say.
 I will be very quickly.
But I will tell you, Hillary will tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat ISIS, which she could have defeated by never having it, you know, get going in the first place.
Right now it's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them, because they're in more and more places, more and more states, more and more nations and it's a big problem, and as far as Japan is concerned, I want to help all of our allies.
But we are losing billions and billions of dollars.
We cannot be the policeman of the world.
We cannot protect countries all over the world.
 Where they're not paying us what we need.
 She doesnt say that, because she has no business ability.
We need heart, we need a lot of things, but you have to have some basic ability.
And sadly, she doesn't have that.
All of the things that she's talking about could have been taken care of during the last ten years, let's say, while she had great power, but they weren't taken care.
And if she ever wins this race, they won't be taken care of.
 She doesn't have the look.
She doesn't have the stamina.
I said she doesn't have the stamina, and I don't believe she does have the stamina.
To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.
 Wait a minute, Lester.
You asked me a question.
Did you ask me a question?
You have to be able to negotiate our trade deals.
You have to be able to negotiate.
That's right.
With Japan, with Saudi Arabia.
I mean, can you imagine, we're defending Saudi Arabia and with all of the money they have, we're defending them, and they're not paying, all you have to do is speak to them.
Wait, you have so many different things, you have to be able to do, and I don't believe that Hillary has the stamina.
 Well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina.
 The world.
 Let me tell you.
Let me tell you.
Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience.
We have made so many bad deals during the last -- So she has experience, I agree.
But it's bad, bad experience, whether it's the Iran deal that you're so in love with, where we gave them $150 billion back.
Whether its the Iran deal, whether its uh, anything -- man, you almost can't name a good deal.
I agree, she's got experience, but it's bad experience.
And this country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of bad experience.
 One thing, Lester.
He tried to switch from looks to stamina.
But this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs, and dogs.
And someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said --
 I never said that.
 Women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.
 Didnt say that.
 And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest.
He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them.
And he called this woman Ms. Piggy.
Then he called her Ms. Housekeeping, because she was Latina.
Donald, she has a name.
 Where did you find this?
Where did you find this?
 Her name is Alicia Machado and she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet she's going to vote this November.
 OK, good.
Let me just tell you.
 Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials.
Some of it's said in entertainment, some of its said to somebody who's been very tough to me, Rosie O'Donnell.
I said very tough things to her and I think that everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her.
But you want to know the truth?
I was going to say something --
 Extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, I can't do it.
I just can't do it.
It's inappropriate.
It's not nice.
But she's spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue, theyre and they're misrepresentations, and I will tell you this, Lester, it's not nice, and I don't deserve that, but it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done.
Its hundreds of millions of ads.
And the only gratifying thing is I saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money--
 -- over $200 million spent, and I'm either winning or tied.
And Ive spent practically nothing.
 Well, I support our democracy.
And sometimes you win.
Sometimes you lose.
But I certainly will support the outcome of this election.
And I know Donald's trying very hard to plant doubts about it, but I hope the people out there understand: This elections really up to you.
It's not about us so much as it is about you and your families and the kind of country and future you want.
So I sure hope you will get out and vote as though your future depended on it because it does.
 I want to make America great again.
We are a nation that is seriously troubled.
Were losing our jobs, people are pouring into our country.
 I want to make America great again.
Im going to be able to do it, I dont think Hillary will.
The answer is, If she wins, I will absolutely support her.
 Well first of all, I don't agree with Senator Kennedy that Cuba is lost and certainly China was lost when this Administration came into power in 1953.
As I look at Cuba today, I believe that we are following the right course, a course which is difficult but a course which under the circumstance is the only proper one which will see that the Cuban people get a chance to realize their aspirations of progress through freedom and that they get that with our cooperation with the other organi- of the states in the Organization of American States.
Now Senator Kennedy has made some very strong criticisms of my part - or alleged part - in what has happened in Cuba.
He points to the fact that I visited Cuba while Mr. Batista was in power there.
I can only point out that if we are going to judge the Administrations in terms of our attitude toward dictators, we're glad to have a comparison with the previous administration.
There were eleven dictators in South America and in Central America when we came in, in 1953.
Today there are only three left including the one in Cuba.
We think that's pretty good progress.
Senator Kennedy also indicated with regard to Cuba that he thought that I had made a mistake when I was in Cuba in not calling for free elections in that country.
Now I'm very surprised that Senator Kennedy, who is on the Foreign Relations Committee, would have made such a statement as this kind.
As a matter of fact in his book, The Strategy for Peace, he took the right position.
And that position is that the United States has a treaty - a treaty with all of the Organization of American States - which prohibits us from interfering in the internal affairs of any other state and prohibits them as well.
For me to have made such a statement would been in direct uh - opposition to that treaty.
Now with regard to Cuba, let me make one thing clear.
There isn't any question but that we will defend our rights there.
There isn't any question but that we will defend Guantanamo if it's attacked.
There also isn't any question but that the free people of Cuba - the people who want to be free - are going to be supported and that they will attain their freedom.
No, Cuba is not lost, and I don't think this kind of defeatist talk by Senator Kennedy helps the situation one bit.
 In the first place I've never suggested that Cuba was lost except for the present.
In my speech last night I indicated that I thought that Cuba one day again would be free.
Where I've been critical of the Administration's policy, and where I criticized Mr. Nixon, was because in his press conference in Havana in 1955, he praised the competence and stability of the bicta- bict- Batista dictatorship - that dictatorship had killed over twenty thousand Cubans in seven years.
Secondly, I did not criticize him for not calling for free elections.
What I criticized was the failure of the Administration to use its great influence to persuade the Cuban government to hold free elections, particularly in 1957 and 1958.
Thirdly, Arthur Gardner, a Republican Ambassador, Earl Smith, a Republican Ambassador, in succession - both have indicated in the past six weeks that they reported to Washington that Castro was a Marxist, that Raul Castro was a Communist, and that they got no effective results.
Instead our aid continued to Batista, which was ineffective; we never were on the side of freedom; we never used our influence when we could have used it most effectively - and today Cuba is lost for freedom.
I hope some day it will rise; but I don't think it will rise if we continue the same policies toward Cuba that we did in recent years, and in fact towards all of Latin America - when we've almost ignored the needs of Latin America; we've beamed not a single Voice of America program in Spanish to all of Latin America in the last eight years, except for the three months of the Hungarian uh - revolution.
 Mr. Morgan, I suggested that if the United States felt that it could save the summit conference that it would have been proper for us to have expressed regrets.
In my judgment that statement has been distorted uh - by Mr. Nixon and others in their debates around the country and in their discussions.
Mr. Lodge, on "Meet the Press" a month ago, said if there was ever a case when we did not have law an our side it was in the U-2 incident.
The U-2 flights were proper from the point of view of protecting our security.
But they were not in accordance with international law.
And I said that I felt that rather than tell the lie which we told, rather than indicate that the flights would continue - in fact, I believe Mr. Nixon himself said on May fifteenth that the flights would continue even though Mr. Herter testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that they had been canceled as of May twelfth - that it would have been far better that if we had expressed regrets, if that would have saved the summit, and if the summit is useful - and I believe it is.
The point that is always left out is the fact that we expressed regrets to Castro this winter; that we expressed regrets - the Eisenhower Administration expressed regrets - for a flight over Southern Russia in 1958.
We expressed regrets for a flight over Eastern Germany under this Administration.
The Soviet Union in 1955 expressed regrets to us over the Bering Sea incident.
The Chinese Communists expressed regrets to us over a plane incident in 1956.
That is the accepted procedure between nations; and my judgment is that we should follow the advice of Theodore Roosevelt: Be strong; maintain a strong position; but also speak softly.
I believe that in those cases where international custom calls for the expression of a regret, if that would have kept the summit going, in my judgment it was a proper action.
It's not appeasement.
It's not soft.
I believe we should be stronger than we now are.
I believe we should have a stronger military force.
I believe we should increase our strength all over the world.
But I don't confuse words with strength; and in my judgment if the summit was useful, if it would have brought us closer to peace, that rather than the lie that we told - which has been criticized by all responsible people afterwards - it would have been far better for us to follow the common diplomatic procedure of expressing regrets and then try to move on.
 I think Kenne- Senator Kennedy is wrong on three counts.
First of all, he's wrong in thinking th- er- even suggesting that Mr. Khrushchev might have continued the conference if we had expressed regrets.
He knew these flights were going on long before and that wasn't the reason that he broke up the conference.
Second, he's wrong in the analogies that he makes.
The United States is a strong country.
Whenever we do anything that's wrong, we can express regrets.
But when the president of the United States is doing something that's right, something that is for the purpose of defending the security of this country against surprise attack, he can never express regrets or apologize to anybody, including Mr. Khrushchev.
Now in that connection Senator Kennedy has criticized the President on the ground not only of not expressing regrets, but because he allowed this flight to take place while the summit conference - or immediately before the summit conference occurred.
This seems to me is criticism that again is wrong on his part.
We all remember Pearl Harbor.
We lost three thousand American lives.
We cannot afford an intelligence gap.
And I just want to make my position absolutely clear with regard to getting intelligence information.
I don't intend to see to it that the United States is ever in a position where, while we're negotiating with the Soviet Union, that we discontinue our intelligence effort.
And I don't intend ever to express regrets to Mr. Khrushchev or anybody else if I'm doing something that has the support of the Congress and that is right for the purpose of protecting the security of the United States.
 My intentions in the field of civil rights have been spelled out in the Republican platform.
I think we have to make progress first in the field of employment.
And there we would give statutory authority to the Committee on Government Contracts, which is an effective way of getting real progress made in this area, since about one out of every four jobs is held by and is allotted by people who have government contracts.
Certainly I think all of us agree that when anybody has a government contract, certainly the money that is spent under that contract ought to be disbursed equally without regard to the race or creed or color of the individual who is to be employed.
Second, in the field of schools, we believe that there should be provisions whereby the federal government would give assistance to those districts who do want to integrate their schools.
That of course was rejected as was the government contracts provision by the special session of the Congress to - in which Mr. Kennedy was quite active.
And then as far as other areas are concerned, I think that we have to look to presidential leadership.
And when I speak of presidential leadership, I refer for example to our attitude on the sit-in strikes.
Here we have a situation which causes all of us concern - causes us concern because of the denial of the rights of people to the equality which we think belongs to everybody.
I have talked to Negro mothers.
I've heard them explain - try to explain - how they tell their children how they can go into a store and buy a loaf of bread but then can't go into that store and sit at the counter and get a Coca Cola.
This is wrong, and we have to do something about it.
So, under the circumstances, what do we do?
Well what we do is what the Attorney-General of the United States did under the direction of the President: call in the owners of chain stores and get them to take action.
Now there are other places where the executive can lead, but let me just sum up by saying this: why do I talk every time I'm in the South on civil rights?
Not because I am preaching to the people of the South because this isn't just a Southern problem; it's a Northern problem and a Western problem; it's a problem for all of us.
I do it because it's the responsibility of leadership, I do it because we have to solve this problem together.
I do it right at this time particularly because when we have Khrushchev in this country - a man who has enslaved millions, a man who has slaughtered thousands - we cannot continue to have a situation where he can point the finger at the United States of America and say that we are denying rights to our citizens.
And so I say both the candidates and both the vice presidential candidates, I would hope as well - including Senator Johnson - should talk on this issue at every opportunity.
 Well, Mr. Nixon hasn't discussed the two basic questions: what is going to be done and what will be his policy on implementing the Supreme Court decision of 1954?
Giving aid to schools technically that are trying to carry out the decision is not the great question.
Secondly, what's he going to do to provide fair employment?
He's been the head of the Committee on Government Contracts that's carried out two cases, both in the District of Columbia.
He has not indicated his support of an attempt to provide fair employment practices around the country, so that everyone can get a job regardless of their race or color.
Nor has he indicated that he will support Title Three, which would give the Attorney General additional powers to protect Constitutional rights.
These are the great questions: equality of education in school.
About two percent of our population of white people are - is illiterate, ten per cent of our colored population.
Sixty to seventy percent of our colored children do not finish high school.
These are the questions in these areas that the North and South, East and West are entitled to know.
What will be the leadership of the president in these areas to provide equality of opportunity for employment?
Equality of opportunity in the field of housing, which could be done on all federal supported housing by a stroke of the president's pen.
What will be done to provide equality of education in all sections of the United States?
Those are the questions to which the president must establish a moral tone and moral leadership.
And I can assure you that if I'm elected president we will do so.
 Senator Kennedy has expressed some hopes in this field, hopes which I think all Americans would share who want some problem - some progress in this area.
But let's look at the performance.
When he selected his vice presidential running mate, he selected a man who had voted against most of these proposals and who opposes them at the present time.
Let me s- look also at what I did.
I selected a man who stands with me in this field and who will talk with me and work with me on it.
Now the Senator referred to the Committee on Government Contracts.
And yet that very committee of which I am chairman has been handicapped by the fact that we have not had adequate funds; we have not had adequate powers; we haven't had an adequate staff.
Now in the special session of Congress and also in the session that preceded it, the Democratic Congress - in which there's a two-to-one Democratic majority - was asked by the President to give us the funds and give us the power to do a job and they did nothing at all, And in the special session in which Senator Kennedy was calling the signals, along with Senator Johnson, they turned it down and he himself voted against giving us the powers despite the fact that the bill had already been considered before, that it already had hearings on, and the Congress already knew what it had before it.
All that I can say is this: what we need here are not just high hopes.
What we need is action.
And in the field of executive leadership, I can say that I believe it's essential that the president of the United States not only set the tone but he also must lead; he must act as he talks.
 Mr. Morgan, no matter how well we're doing in the cold war, we're not doing as well as we should.
And that will always be the case as long as the Communists are on the international scene, in the aggressive tac- uh - tendencies that they presently are following.
Now as far as the present situation is concerned, I think it's time that we nail a few of these distortions about the United States that have been put out.
First of all, we hear that our prestige is at an all-time low.
Senator Kennedy has been hitting that point over and over again.
I would suggest that after Premier Kush- Khrushchev's uh - performance in the United Nations, compared with President Eisenhower's eloquent speech, that at the present time Communist prestige in the world is at an all-time low and American prestige is at an all-time high.
Now that, of course, is just one factor, but it's a significant one.
When we look, for example, at the vote on the Congo.
We were on one side; they were on the other side.
What happened?
There were seventy votes for our position and none for theirs.
Look at the votes in the United Nations over the past seven and a half years.
That's a test of prestige.
Every time the United States has been an one side and they've been on the other side, our position has been sustained.
Now looking to what we ought to do in the future.
In this cold war we have to recognize where it is being fought and then we have to develop programs to deal with it.
It's being fought primarily in Asia, in Africa, and in Latin America.
What do we need?
What tools do we need to fight us?
Well we need, for example, economic assistance; we need technical assistance; we need exchange; we need programs of diplomatic and other character which will be effective in that area.
Now Senator Kennedy a moment ago referred to the fact that there was not an adequate Voice of America program for Latin America.
I'd like to point out that in the last six years, the Democratic Congresses, of which he'd been a member, have cut twenty million dollars off of the Voice of America programs.
They also have cut four billion dollars off of mutual security in these last six years.
They also have cut two billion dollars off of defense.
Now when they talk about our record here, it is well that they recognize that they have to stand up for their record as well.
So let me summarize by saying this: I'm not satisfied with what we're doing in the cold war because I believe we have to step up our activities and launch an offensive for the minds and hearts and souls of men.
It must be economic; it must be technological; above all it must be ideological.
But we've got to get help from the Congress in order to do this.
 Of course Mr. Nixon is wholly inaccurate when he says that the Congress has not provided more funds in fact than the President recommended for national defense.
Nineteen fifty-three we tried to put an appropriation of five billion dollars for our defenses.
I was responsible for the amendment with Senator Monroney in 1954 to strengthen our ground forces.
The Congress of the United States appropriated six hundred and seventy-seven million dollars mare than the President was willing to use up till a week ago.
Secondly, on the question of our position in the United Nations.
We all know about the vote held this week - of the five neutralists - and it was generally regarded as a defeat for the United States.
Thirdly, in 1952, there were only seven votes in favor of the admission of Red China into the United Nations.
Last year there were twenty-nine and tomorrow when the preliminary vote is held you will see a strengthening of that position or very closely to it.
We have not maintained our position and our prestige.
A Gallup Poll taken in February of this year asking the - in eight out of nine countries - they asked the people, who do they think would be ahead by 1970 militarily and scientifically, and a majority in eight of the nine countries said the Soviet Union would be by 1970.
Governor Rockefeller has been far more critical in June of our position in the world than I have been.
The Rockefeller Brothers report, General Ridgway, General Gavin, the Gaither Report, various reports of Congressional committees all indicate that the relative strength of the p- United States both militarily, politically, psychologically, and scientifically and industrially - the relative strength of the so- of United States compared to that of the Soviet Union and the Chinese Communists together - has deteriorated in the last eight years and we should know it, and the American people should be told the facts.
 Yes.
We have been wholly indifferent to Latin America until the last few months.
The program that was put forward this summer, after we broke off the sugar quota with Cuba, really was done because we wanted to get through the O.A.S.
meeting a condemnation of Russian infiltration of Cuba.
And therefore we passed an authorization - not an aid bill - which was the first time, really, since the Inter-American Bank which was founded a year ago was developed, that we really have looked at the needs of Latin America; that we have associated ourselves with those people.
Secondly, I believe that in the ca- that it's far better for the United States, instead of concentrating our aid, particularly in the underdeveloped world, on surplus military equipment - we poured three hundred million dollars of surplus military equipment into Laos.
We paid more military aid, more aid into Laos po- per - per person than in any country in the world and we ought to know now that Laos is moving from neutralism in the direction of the Communists.
I believe instead of doing that, we should concentrate our aid in long-term loans which these people can pay back either in hard money or in local currency.
This permits them to maintain their self-respect.
It permits us to make sure that the projects which are invested in are going to produce greater wealth.
And I believe that in cases of India and Africa and Latin America that this is where our emphasis should be.
I would strengthen the Development Loan Fund.
And Senator Fulbright, Senator Humphrey and I tried to do that.
We tried to provide an appropriation of a billion and a half for five years, on a long-term loan basis, which this Administration opposed.
And unless we're ready to carry out programs like that in the sixties, this battle for economic survival which these people are waging are going to be lost.
And if India should lose her battle, with thirty-five per cent of the people of the underdeveloped world within her borders, then I believe that the balance of power could move against us.
I think the United States can afford to do these things.
I think that we could not afford not to do these things.
This goes to our survival.
And here in a country which if it is moving ahead, if it's developing its economy to the fullest - which we are not now - in my judgment, we'll have the resources to meet our military commitments and also our commitments overseas.
I believe it's essential that we do it because in the next ten years the balance of power is going to begin to move in the world from one direction or another - towards us or towards the Communists - and unless we begin to identify ourselves not only with the anti-Communist fight, but also with the fight against poverty and hunger, these people are going to begin to turn to the Communists as an example.
I believe we can do it.
If we build our economy the way we should, we can afford to do these things and we must do it.
 Senator Kennedy has put a great deal of stress on the necessity for economic assistance.
This is important.
But it's also tremendously important to bear in mind that when you pour in money without pouring in technical assistance at w- as well, that you have a disastrous situation.
We need to step up exchange; we need to step up technical assistance so that trained people in these newly developing countries can operate the economies.
We also have to have in mind something else with regard to this whole situation in the world, and that is: that as America moves forward, we not only must think in terms of fighting Communism, but we must also think primarily in terms of the interests of these countries.
We must associate ourselves with their aspirations.
We must let them know that the great American ideals - of independence, of the right of people to be free, and of the right to progress - that these are ideals that belong not to ourselves alone, but they belong to everybody.
This we must get across to the world.
And we can't do it unless we do have adequate funds for, for example, information which has been cut by the Congress, adequate funds for technical assistance.
The other point that I would make with regard to economic assistance and technical assistance is that the United States must not rest its case here alone.
This is primarily an ideological battle - a battle for the minds and the hearts and the souls of men.
We must not meet the Communists purely in the field of gross atheistic materialism.
We must stand for our ideals.
 To combat unemployment we first must concentrate on the very areas to which you refer - the so-called depressed areas.
Now in the last Congress - the special session of the Congress - there was a bill: one by the President, one by Senator Kennedy and members of his party.
Now the bill that the President had submitted would have provided more aid for those areas that really need it - areas like Scranton and Wilkes-Barre and the areas of West Virginia - than the ones that Senator Kennedy was supporting.
On the other hand we found that the bill got into the legislative difficulties and consequently no action was taken.
So point one, at the highest priority we must get a bill for depressed areas through the next Congress.
I have made recommendations on that and I have discussed them previously and I will spell them out further in the campaign.
Second, as we consider this problem of unemployment, we have to realize where it is.
In analyzing the figures we will find that our unemployment exists among the older citizens; it exists also among those who are inadequately trained; that is, those who do not have an adequate opportunity for education.
It also exists among minority groups.
If we're going to combat unemployment, then, we have to do a better job in these areas.
That's why I have a program for education, a program in the case of equal job opportunities, and one that would also deal with our older citizens.
Now finally, with regard to the whole problem of combating recession, as you call it, we must use the full resources of the government in these respects: one, we must see to it that credit is expanded as we go into any recessionary period - and understand, I do not believe we're going into a recession.
I believe this economy is sound and that we're going to move up.
But second, in addition to that, if we do get into a recessionary period we should move on that part of the economy which is represented by the private sector, and I mean stimulate that part of the economy that can create jobs - the private sector of the economy.
This means through tax reform and if necessary tax cuts that will stimulate more jobs.
I favor that rather than massive federal spending programs which will come into effect usually long after you've passed through the recessionary period.
So we must use all of these weapons for the purpose of combating recession if it should come.
But I do not expect it to come.
 Well Mr. Nixon has stated the record inaccurately in regard to the depressed area bill.
I'm very familiar with it.
It came out of the committee of which I was the chairman - the labor subcommittee - in fifty-five.
I was the floor manager.
We passed an area redevelopment bill far more effective than the bill the Administration suggested, on two occasions, and the President vetoed it both times.
We passed a bill again this year in the cong- in the Senate and it died in the Rules Committee of the House of Representatives.
Let me make it very clear that the bill that Mr. Nixon talked about did not mention Wilkes-Barre or Scranton; it did not mention West Virginia.
Our bill was far more effective.
The bill introduced and erd- sponsored by Senator Douglas was far more effective in trying to stimulate the economy of those areas.
Secondly, he has mentioned the problem of our older citizens.
I cannot still understand why this Administration and Mr. Nixon oppose putting medical care for the aged under Social Security to give them some security.
Third, I believe we should step up the use of our surplus foods in these areas until we're able to get the people back to work.
Five cents a day - that's what the food package averages per person.
Fourthly, I believe we should not carry out a hard money, high interest rate policy which helped intensify certainly the recession of 1958, and I think helped bring the slow-down of 1960.
If we move into a recession in sixty-one, then I would agree that we have to put more money into the economy, and it can be done by either one of the two methods discussed.
One is by ex- the programs such as aid to education.
The other would be to make a judgment on what's the most effective tax program to stimulate our economy.
 Well I understood that this was the Eisenhower-Nixon Administration according to all the Republican uh - propaganda that I've read.
The question is what we're going to do in the future.
I've been critical of this Administration and I've been critical of the President.
In fact uh - Mr. Nixon uh - discussed that a week ago in a speech.
I believe that our power and prestige in the last eight years has declined.
Now what is the issue is what we're going to do in the future.
Now that's an issue between Mr. Nixon and myself.
He feels that we're moving ahead uh - in a - we're not going into a recession in this country, economically; he feels that our power and prestige is stronger than it ever was relative to that of the Communists, that we're moving ahead.
I disagree.
And I believe the American people have to make the choice on November eighth between the view of whether we have to move ahead faster, whether what we're doing now is not satisfactory, whether we have to build greater strength at home and abroad and Mr. Nixon's view.
That's the great issue.
President Eisenhower moves from the scene on January twentieth and the next four years are the critical years.
And that's the debate.
That's the argument between Mr. Nixon and myself and on that issue the American people have to make their judgment and I think it's a important judgment.
I think in many ways this election is more important than any since 1932, or certainly almost any in this century.
Because we disagree very fundamentally on the position of the United States, and if his view prevails then I think that's going to bring an important result to this country in the sixties.
If our view prevails that we have to do more, that we have to make a greater national and international effort, that we have lost prestige in Latin America - the President of Brazil - the new incumbent running for office called on Castro during his campaign because he thought it was important to get the vote of those who were supporting Castro in Latin America.
In Africa, the United States has ignored Latin uh - Africa.
We gave more scholarships to the Congo - this summer we offered them - than we've given to all of Africa the year before.
Less than two hundred for all the countries of Africa and they need trained leadership more than anything.
We've been uh - having a very clear decision in the last eight years.
Mr. Nixon has been part of that Administration.
He's had experience in it.
And I believe this Administration has not met its responsibilities in the last eight years, that our power relative to that of the Communists is declining, that we're facing a very hazardous time in the sixties, and unless the United States begin to move here - unless we start to go ahead - I don't believe that we're going to meet our responsibility to our own people or to the cause of freedom.
I think the choice is clear and it involves the future.
 Well first of all, I think Senator Kennedy should make up his mind with regard to my responsibility.
In our first debate he indicated that I had not had experience or at least uh - had not participated significantly in the making of the decisions.
I'm glad to hear tonight that he does suggest that I have had some experience.
Let me make my position cl ear.
I have participated in the discussions leading to the decisions in this Administration.
I'm proud of the record of this Administration.
I don't stand on it because it isn't something to stand on but something to build on.
Now looking at Senator Kennedy's credentials: he is suggesting that he will move America faster and further than I will.
But what does he offer?
He offers retreads of programs that failed.
I submit to you that as you look at his programs, his program for example with regard to the Federal Reserve and uh - free money or loose money uh - high - low interest rates, his program in the economic field generally are the programs that were adopted and tried during the Truman Administration.
And when we compare the economic progress of this country in the Truman Administration with that of the Eisenhower Administration, we find that in every index there has been a tr- great deal more performance and more progress in this Administration than in that one.
I say the programs and the leadership that failed then is not the program and the leadership that America needs now.
I say that the American people don't want to go back to those policies.
And incidentally if Senator Kennedy disagrees, he should indicate where he believes those policies are different from those he's advocating today.
 No, of course I haven't talked to Prime Minister Macmillan.
It would not be appropriate for me to do so.
The President is still going to be president for the next four months and he, of course, is the only one who could commit this country in this period.
As far as a summit conference is concerned, I want to make my position absolutely clear.
I would be willing as president to meet with Mr. Khrushchev or any other world leader if it would serve the cause of peace.
I would not be able wou- would be willing to meet with him however, unless there were preparations for that conference which would give us some reasonable certainty - some reasonable certainty - that you were going to have some success.
We must not build up the hopes of the world and then dash them as was the case in Paris.
There, Mr. Khrushchev came to that conference determined to break it up.
He was going to break it up because he would - knew that he wasn't going to get his way on Berlin and on the other key matters with which he was concerned at the Paris Conference.
Now, if we're going to have another summit conference, there must be negotiations at the diplomatic level - the ambassadors, the Secretaries of State, and others at that level - prior to that time, which will delineate the issues and which will prepare the way for the heads of state to meet and make some progress.
Otherwise, if we find the heads of state meeting and not making progress, we will find that the cause of peace will have been hurt rather than helped.
So under these circumstances, I, therefore, strongly urge and I will strongly hold, if I have the opportunity to urge or to hold - this position: that any summit conference would be gone into only after the most careful preparation and only after Mr. Khrushchev - after his disgraceful conduct at Paris, after his disgraceful conduct at the United Nations - gave some assurance that he really wanted to sit down and talk and to accomplish something and not just to make propaganda.
 I have no disagreement with the Vice President's position on that.
It - my view is the same as his.
Let me say there is only one uh - point I would add.
That before we go into the summit, before we ever meet again, I think it's important that the United States build its strength; that it build its military strength as well as its own economic strength.
If we negotiate from a position where the power balance or wave is moving away from us, it's extremely difficult to reach a successful decision on Berlin as well as the other questions.
Now the next president of the United States in his first year is going to be confronted with a very serious question on our defense of Berlin, our commitment to Berlin.
It's going to be a test of our nerve and will.
It's going to be a test of our strength.
And because we're going to move in sixty-one and two, partly because we have not maintained our strength with sufficient vigor in the last years, I believe that before we meet that crisis, that the next president of the United States should send a message to Congress asking for a revitalization of our military strength, because come spring or late in the winter we're going to be face to face with the most serious Berlin crisis since l949 or fifty.
On the question of the summit, I agree with the position of Mr. Nixon.
I would not meet Mr. Khrushchev unless there were some agreements at the secondary level - foreign ministers or ambassadors - which would indicate that the meeting would have some hope of success, or a useful exchange of ideas.
 That's right.
 Well I don't think that in the winter of sixty-one under present economic conditions, it uh - a - uh - tax uh - increase would be desirable.
In fact, it would be deflationary; it would cause great unemployment; it would cause a real slowdown in our economy.
If it ever becomes necessary, and is wise economically and essential to our security, I would have no hesitancy in suggesting a tax increase or any other policy which would defend the United States.
I have talked in every speech about the fact that these are going to be very difficult times in the nineteen-sixties and that we're going to have to meet our responsibilities as citizens.
I'm talking about a national mood.
I'm talking about our willingness to bear any burdens in order to maintain our own freedom and in order to meet our freedom around the globe.
We don't know what the future's going to bring.
But I would not want anyone to elect me uh - president of the United States - or vote for me - under the expectation that life would be easier if I were elected.
Now, many of the programs that I'm talking about - economic growth, care for the aged, development of our natural resources - build the strength of the United States.
That's how the United States began to prepare for its great actions in World War II and in the post-war period.
If we're moving ahead, if we're providing a viable economy, if our people have sufficient resources so that they can consume what we produce; then this country's on the move, then we're stronger, then we set a better example to the world.
So we have the problem of not only building our own uh - military strength and extending uh - our policies abroad, we have to do a job here at home.
So I believe that the policies that I recommend came under the general heading of strengthening the United States.
We're using our steel capacity fifty-five per cent today.
We're not able to consume what we're able to produce at a time when the Soviet Union is making great economic gains.
And all I say is, I don't know what the sixties will bring - except I think they will bring hard times in the uh - international sphere; I hope we can move ahead here at home in the United States; I'm confident we can do a far better job of mobilizing our economy and resources in the United States.
And I merely say that they - if they elect me president, I will do my best to carry the United States through a difficult period; but I would not want people to elect me because I promised them the easy, soft life.
I think it's going to be difficult; but I'm confident that this country can meet its responsibilities.
 Well I think we should be no - under no illusions whatever about what the responsibilities of the American people will be in the sixties.
Our expenditures for defense, our expenditures for mutual security, our expenditures for economic assistance and technical assistance are not going to get less.
In my opinion they're going to be de- be greater.
I think it may be necessary that we have more taxes.
I hope not.
I hope we can economize elsewhere so that we don't have to.
But I would have no hesitation to ask the American people to pay the taxes even in l961 - if necessary - to maintain a sound economy and also to maintain a sound dollar.
Because when you do not tax, and tax enough to pay for your outgo, you pay it many times over in higher prices and inflation; and I simply will not do that.
I think I should also add that as far as Senator Kennedy's proposals are concerned, if he intends to carry out his platform - the one adopted in Los Angeles - it is just impossible for him to make good on those promises without raising taxes or without having a rise in t- prices or both.
The platform suggests that it can be done through economic growth; that it can be done, in effect, with mirrors.
But it isn't going to be working that way.
You can't add billions of dollars to our expenditures and not pay for it.
After all, it isn't paid for by my money, it isn't paid for by his, but by the people's money.
 I did.
And as I pointed out in 1952, I made it very clear that as far as the Korean War was concerned, that I felt that the decision to go into the war in Korea was right and necessary.
What I criticized were the policies that made it necessary to go to Korea.
Now incidentally, I should point out here that Senator Kennedy has attacked our foreign policy.
He's said that it's been a policy that has led to defeat and retreat.
And I'd like to know where have we been defeated and where have we retreated?
In the Truman Administration, six hundred million people went behind the Iron Curtain including the satellite countries of Eastern Europe and Communist China.
In this Administration we've stopped them at Quemoy and Matsu; we've stopped them in Indochina; we've stopped them in Lebanon; we've stopped them in other parts of the world.
I would also like to point out that as far as Senator Kennedy's comments are concerned, I think he has a perfect right and a responsibility to criticize this Administration whenever he thinks we're wrong.
But he has a responsibility to be accurate, and not to misstate the case.
I don't think he should say that our prestige is at an all-time low.
I think this is very harmful at a time Mr. Khrushchev is here - harmful because it's wrong.
I don't think it was helpful when he suggested - and I'm glad he's corrected this to an extent - that seventeen million people go to bed hungry every night in the United States.
Now this just wasn't true.
Now, there are people who go to bed hungry in the United States - far less, incidentally, than used to go to bed hungry when we came into power at the end of the Truman Administration.
But the thing that is right about the United States, it should be emphasized, is that less people go to bed hungry in the United States than in any major country in the world.
We're the best fed; we're the best clothed, with a better distribution of this world's goods to all of our people than any people in history.
Now, in pointing out the things that are wrong, I think we ought to emphasize America's strengths.
It isn't necessary to - to run America down in order to build her up.
Now so that we get it absolutely clear: Senator Kennedy must as a candidate - as I as a candidate in fifty-two - criticize us when we're wrong.
And he's doing a very effective job of that, in his way.
But on the other hand, he has a responsibility to be accurate.
And I have a responsibility to correct him every time he misstates the case; and I intend to continue to do so.
 Well, Mr. Nixon uh- I'll just give you the testimony of Mr. George Aiken - Senator George Aiken, the ranking minority member - Republican member - and former chairman of the Senate Agricultural Committee testifying in 1959 - said there were twenty-six million Americans who did not have the income to afford a decent diet.
Mr. Benson, testifying on the food stamp plan in 1957, said there were twenty-five million Americans who could not afford a elementary low-cost diet.
And he defined that as someone who uses beans in place of meat.
Now I've seen a good many hundreds of thousands of people who are uh - not adequately fed.
You can't tell me that a surplus food distribution of five cents po- per person - and that n- nearly six million Americans receiving that - is adequate.
You can't tell me that any one who uses beans instead of meat in the United States - and there are twenty-five million of them according to Mr. Benson - is well fed or adequately fed.
I believe that we should not compare what our figures may be to India or some other country that has serious problems but to remember that we are the most prosperous country in the world and that these people are not getting adequate food.
And they're not getting in many cases adequate shelter.
And we ought to try to meet the problem.
Secondly, Mr. Nixon has continued to state - and he stated it last week - these fantastic figures of what the Democratic budget would c- uh - platform would cost.
They're wholly inaccurate.
I said last week I believed in a balanced budget.
Unless there was a severe recession - and after all the worst unbalanced budget in history was in 1958, twelve billion dollars - larger than in any Administration in the history of the United States.
So that I believe that on this subject we can balance the budget unless we have a national emergency or unless we have a severe recession.
 Well, the United States uh - has on occasion attempted uh - mostly in the middle fifties, to persuade Chiang Kai-shek to pull his troops back to Formosa.
I believe strongly in the defense of Formosa.
These islands are a few miles - five or six miles - off the coast of Red China, within a general harbor area and more than a hundred miles from Formosa.
We have never said flatly that we will defend Quemoy and Matsu if it's attacked.
We say we will defend it if it's part of a general attack on Formosa.
But it's extremely difficult to make that judgment.
Now, Mr. Herter in 1958, when he was Under Secretary of State, said they were strategically undefensible.
Admirals Spruance and Callins in 1955 said that we should not attempt to defend these islands, in their conference in the Far East.
General Ridgway has said the same thing.
I believe that when you get into a w- if you're going to get into war for the defense of Formosa, it ought to be on a clearly defined line.
One of the problems, I think, at the time of South Korea was the question of whether the United States would defend it if it were attacked.
I believe that we should defend Formosa.
We should come to its defense.
To leave this rather in the air, that we will defend it under some conditions but not under other, I think is a mistake.
Secondly, I would not suggest the withdrawal at the point of the Communist gun.
It is a decision finally that the Nationalists should make and I believe that we should consult with them and attempt to work out a plan by which the line is drawn at the island of Formosa.
It leaves a hundred miles between the sea.
But with General Ridgway, Mr. Herter, General Collins, Admiral Spruance and many others, I think it's unwise to take the chance of being dragged into a war which may lead to a world war over two islands which are not strategically defensible, which are not, according to their testimony, essential to the defense of Formosa.
I think that uh - we should protect our commitments.
I believe strongly we should do so in Berlin.
I believe strongly we should d- do so in Formosa and I believe we should meet our commitments to every country whose security we've guaranteed.
But I do not believe that that line in case of war should be drawn on those islands but instead on the island of Formosa.
And as long as they are not essential to the defense of Formosa, it's been my judgment ever since 1954, at the time of the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Far East, that our line should be drawn in the sea around the island itself.
 I disagree completely with Senator Kennedy on this point.
I remember in the period immediately before the Korean War, South Korea was supposed to be indefensible as well.
Generals testified to that.
And Secretary Acheson made a very famous speech at the Press Club, early in the year that k- Korean War started, indicating in effect that South Korea was beyond the defense zone of the United States.
I suppose it was hoped when he made that speech that we wouldn't get into a war.
But it didn't mean that.
We had to go in when they came in.
Now I think as far as Quemoy and Matsu are concerned, that the question is not these two little pieces of real estate - they are unimportant.
It isn't the few people who live on them - they are not too important.
It's the principle involved.
These two islands are in the area of freedom.
The Nationalists have these two islands.
We should not uh - force our Nationalist allies to get off of them and give them to the Communists.
If we do that we start a chain reaction; because the Communists aren't after Quemoy and Matsu, they're a- they're after Formosa.
In my opinion this is the same kind of woolly thinking that led to disaster for America in Korea.
I am against it.
I would never tolerate it as president of the United States, and I will hope that Senator Kennedy will change his mind if he should be elected.
 Well, let me say I do think that parties are important in that they tell something about the program and something about the man.
Abraham Lincoln was a great president of all the people; but he was selected by his party at a key time in history because his party stood for something.
The Democratic party in this century has stood for something.
It has stood for progress; it has stood for concern for the people's welfare.
It has stood for a strong foreign policy and a strong national defense, and as a result, produced Wilson, President Roosevelt, and President Truman.
The Republican party has produced McKinley and Harding, Coolidge, Dewey, and Landon.
They do stand for something.
They stand for a whole different approach to the problems facing this country at home and abroad.
That's the importance of party; only if it tells something about the record.
And the Republicans in recent years - not only in the last twenty-five years, but in the last eight years - have opposed housing, opposed care for the aged, opposed federal aid to education, opposed minimum wage and I think that record tells something.
 Well I think this Republican administration has been almost all style, and spectacular, and not substance.
We've uh - got a chance tonight to talk about, first of all, leadership, the character of our country, and a vision of the future.
In every one of these instances, the Ford administration has failed, and I hope tonight that I and Mr. Ford will have a chance to discuss the reasons for those failures.
Our country is not strong anymore; we're not respected anymore.
We can only be strong overseas if we're strong at home; and when I became president we'll not only be strong in those areas but also in defense - a defense capability second to none.
We've lost in our foreign policy, the character of the American people.
We've uh - ignored or excluded the American people and the Congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy.
It's been one of secrecy and exclusion.
In addition to that we've had a chance to became now, contrary to our long-standing beliefs and principles, the arms merchant of the whole world.
We've tried to buy success from our enemies, and at the same time we've excluded from the process the normal friendship of our allies.
In addition to that we've become fearful to compete with the Soviet Union on an equal basis.
We talk about detente.
The Soviet Union knows what they want in detente, and they've been getting it.
We have not known what we've wanted and we've been out-traded in almost every instance.
The other point I wanna make is about our defense.
We've got to be a nation blessed with a defense capability that's efficient, tough, capable, well organized, narrowly focused - fighting capability.
The ability to fight, if necessary, is the best way to avoid the chance for, or the requirement to fight.
And the last point I wanna make is this: Mr. Ford, Mr. Kissinger have uh - continued on with the policies and failures of Richard Nixon.
Even the Republican platform has criticized the lack of leadership in Mr. Ford and they've criticized the foreign policy of this administration.
This is one instance where I agree with - with the Republican platform.
I might say this in closing, and that is that as far as foreign policy goes, Mr. Kissinger has been the president of this country.
Mr. Ford has shown an absence of leadership, and an absence of a grasp of what this country is and what it ought to be.
That's got to be changed.
And that's one of the major issues in this uh - campaign of 1976.
 Governor Carter again is talking in broad generalities.
Let me take just one question that he raises - the military strength and capability of the United States.
Governor Carter in November of 1975 indicated that he wanted to cut the defense budget by $15 billion.
A few months later, he said he wanted to cut the defense budget by eight or nine billion dollars.
And more recently, he talks about cutting the defense budget by five to seven billion dollars.
There is no way you can be strong militarily and have those kind of reductions in our military uh - appropriation.
Now let me just tell you a little story.
About uh - late October of 1975, I asked the then Secretary of Defense, Mr. Schlesinger, to tell me what had to be done if we were going to reduce the defense budget by uh - three to five billion dollars.
A few days later, Mr. Schlesinger came back and said if we cut the defense budget by three to five billion dollars, we will have to cut military personnel by two hundred and fifty thousand, civilian personnel by a hundred thousand, jobs in America by a hundred thousand.
We would have to stretch out our aircraft procurement, we would have to reduce our naval construction program, we would have to reduce the uh - research and development for the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and Marines by 8 percent.
We would have to close twenty military bases in the United States immediately.
That's the kind of defense program that uh - Mr. Carter wants.
Let me tell you this straight from the shoulder.
You don't negotiate with Mr. Brezhnev from weakness.
And the kind of defense program that Mr. Carter wants will mean a weaker defense and a poor negotiating position.
 I don't believe we should move to a cold-war relationship.
I think it's in the best interest of the United States, and the world as a whole that the United States negotiate rather than go back to the cold-war relationship with the Soviet Union.
I don't uh - look at the picture as bleakly as you have indicated in your question, Mr. Trewhitt.
I believe that the United States ha- had many successes in recent years, in recent months, as far as the Communist movement is concerned.
We have been successful in Portugal, where a year ago it looked like there was a very great possibility that the uh - Communists would take over in Portugal.
It didn't happen.
We have a democracy in Portugal today.
A few uh - months ago, or I should say, maybe two years ago, the Soviet Union looked like they had continued strength in the Middle East.
Today, according to Prime Minister Rabin, the Soviet Union is weaker in the Middle East than they have been in many, many years.
The facts are, there - the Soviet Union relationship with Egypt is uh - at a low level.
The Soviet Union relationship with Syria is at a very low point.
The United States today, according to Prime Minister Rabin of Israel, is a- at a peak in its uh - influence and power in the Middle East.
But let's turn for a minute to the uhh - southern African operations that are now going on.
The United States of America took the initiative in southern Africa.
We wanted to end the bloodshed in southern Africa.
We wanted to have the right of self-determination in southern Africa.
We wanted to have majority rule with the full protection of the rights of the minority.
We wanted to preserve human dignity in southern Africa.
We have taken the initiative, and in southern Africa today the United States is trusted by the black front-line nations and black Africa.
The United States is trusted by other elements in southern Africa.
The United States foreign policy under this administration has been one of progress and success.
And I believe that instead of talking about Soviet progress, we can talk about American successes.
And may I make an observation - part of the question you asked, Mr. Trewhitt?
I don't believe that it's in the best interest of the United States and the NATO nations to have a Communist government in NATO.
Mr. Carter has indicated he would look with sympathy to a Communist government in NATO.
I think that would destroy the integrity and the strength of NATO, and I am totally opposed to it.
 Well, Mr. Ford, unfortunately, has just made a statement that's not true.
I have never advocated a Communist government for Italy.
That would obviously be a ridiculous thing for anyone to do who wanted to be president of this country.
I think that this is uh - an instance of uh - deliberate distortion, and this has occurred also in the question about defense.
As a matter of fact, uh - I've never advocated any cut of $15 billion in our defense budget.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Ford has made a political football out of the defense budget.
About a year ago he cut the Pentagon budget six point eight billion dollars.
After he fired James Schlesinger, the political heat got so great that he added back about $3 billion.
When Ronald Reagan won the Texas primary election, Mr. Ford added back another one and a half billion dollars.
Immediately before the Kansas City convention, he added back another one point eight billion dollars in the defense budget.
And his own uh - Office of Management and Budget testified that he had a $3 billion cut insurance added to the defense budget - defense budget under the pressure from the Pentagon.
Obviously, this is another indication of trying to use the defense budget for political purposes, which he's trying to do tonight.
Now, we went into south Africa late, after Great Britain, Rhodesia, the black nations had been trying to solve this problem for many, many years.
We didn't go in until right before the election, similar to what was taking place in 1972, when Mr. Kissinger announced peace is at hand just before the election at that time.
And we have weakened our position in NATO because the other countries in Europe supported the democ- democratic forces in Portugal long before we did; we stuck to the Portugal dictatorships much longer than other democracies did in this world.
 Well, I'm not gonna name my cabinet before I get elected.
I've got a little ways to go before I start doing that.
But I have uh - an adequate background, I believe.
I am a graduate of the U.S.
Naval Academy, the first military graduate since uh - Eisenhower.
I've served as the Governor of Georgia and have traveled extensively in foreign countries and South America, Central America, Europe, the Middle East and in Japan.
I've traveled the last twenty-one months among the people of this country.
I've talked to them and I've listened.
And I've seen at first hand, in a very vivid way, the deep hurt that's come to this country in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia, Chile, and Pakistan, and Angola, and Watergate, CIA revelations.
What we were formerly so proud of - the strength of our country, its uh - moral integrity, the representation in foreign affairs of what our people are, what our Constitution stands for, has been gone.
And in the secrecy that has surrounded our foreign policy in the last few years, uh - the American people, the Congress have been excluded.
I believe I know what this country ought to be.
I've uh - been one who's loved my nation as many Americans do, and I believe that there's no limit placed on what we can be in the future, if we can harness the tremendous resources - militarily, economically, and the stature of our people, the meaning of the Constitution, in the future.
Every time we've made a serious mistake in foreign affairs, it's been because the American people have been excluded from the process.
If we can just tap the intelligence and ability, the sound common sense and the good judgment of the American people, we can once again have a foreign policy to make us proud instead of ashamed.
And I'm not gonna exclude the American people from that process in the future, as Mr. Ford and Kissinger have done.
This is what it takes to have a sound foreign policy strong at home, strong defense, permanent commitments, not betray the principles of our country, and involve the American people and the Congress in the shaping of our foreign policy.
Every time Mr. Ford speaks from a position of secrecy in negotiations, in secret - in secret treaties that've been uh - pursued and achieved, in supporting dictatorships, in ignoring human rights, we are weak and the rest of the world knows it.
So these are the ways that we can restore the strength of our country, and they don't require long experience in foreign policy.
Nobody has that except a president who has served a long time or a secretary of state.
But my background, my experience, my knowledge of the people of this country, my commitment to our principles that don't change - those are the best bases to correct the horrible mistakes of this administration and restore our own country to a position of leadership in the world.
 First of all, I would quit conducting the decision-making process in secret, as has been a characteristic of Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Ford.
In many instances we've made agreements, like in Vietnam, uh - that have uh - been revealed later on to our uh - embarrassment.
Recently Ian Smith, the uh - president of uh - Rhodesia, announced that he had unequivocal commitments from Mr. Kissinger that he could not reveal.
The American people don't know what those commitments are.
We've seen uh - in the past the destruction of elected governments, like in Chile, and the strong support of military dictatorship there.
These kinds of things have hurt us very much.
I would restore the concept of the fireside chat, which was an integral part of the administration of Franklin Roosevelt.
And I would also restore the involvement of the Congress.
When Harry Truman was president he was not afraid to have a strong secretary of defense.
Dean Acheson, George Marshall were strong secretaries of uh - state - excuse me - state.
But he also made sure that there was a bipartisan support.
The members of Congress, Arthur Vandenberg, Walter George, were part of the process, and before our nation made a secret agreement, or before we made a bluffing statement, we were sure that we had the backing not only of the president and the secretary of state, but also of the Congress and the people.
This is a responsibility of the president.
And I think it's very damaging to our country for Mr. Ford to have turned over this responsibility to the secretary of state.
 Governor Carter again contradicts himself.
He complains about secrecy and yet he is quoted as saying that in the attempt to find a solution in the Middle East that he would hold unpublicized meetings with the Soviet Union - I presume for the purpose of an - imposing a settlement on Israel and the Arab nations.
But let me talk just a minute about what we've done to avoid secrecy in the Ford administration.
After the United States took the initiative in working with Israel and with Egypt and achieving the Sinai II agreement - and I'm proud to say that not a single Egyptian or Israeli soldier has lost his life since the signing of the Sinai agreement.
But at the time that uh - I submitted the Sinai agreement to the Congress of the United States, I submitted every single document that was applicable to the Sinai II agreement.
It was the most complete documentation by any president of any agreement signed by a president on behalf of the United States.
Now as far as meeting with the Congress is concerned, during the twenty-four months that I've been the president of the United States I have averaged better than one meeting a month with responsible groups or committees of the Congress - both House and Senate.
The secretary of state has appeared in the several years that he's been the secretary before eighty different uh - committee hearings in the House and in the Senate.
The secretary of state has made better than fifty speeches all over the United States explaining American foreign policy.
I have made myself at least ten uh - speeches in various parts of the country where I have discussed with the American people defense and foreign policy.
 I believe that we have uh - negotiated with the Soviet Union since I've been president from a position of strength.
And let me cite several examples.
Shortly after I became president in uh - December of 1974, I met with uh - General Secretary Brezhnev in Vladivostok and we agreed to a mutual cap on the ballistic missile launchers at a ceiling of twenty-four hundred - which means that the Soviet Union, if that becomes a permanent agreement, will have to make a reduction in their launchers that they now have or plan to have.
I've negotiated at Vladivostok with uh - Mr. Brezhnev a limitation on the MIRVing of their ballistic missiles at a figure of thirteen-twenty, which is the first time that any president has achieved a cap either on launchers or on MIRVs.
It seems to me that we can go from there to uh - the uh - grain sales.
The grain sales have been a benefit to American agriculture.
We have achieved a five and three quarter year uh - sale of a minimum six million metric tons, which means that they have already bought about four million metric tons this year and are bound to buy another two million metric tons to take the grain and corn and wheat that the American farmers have produced in order to uh - have full production.
And these grain sales to the Soviet Union have helped us tremendously in meeting the costs of the additional oil and - the oil that we have bought from overseas.
If we turn to Helsinki - I'm glad you raised it, Mr. uh - Frankel.
In the case of Helsinki, thirty-five nations signed an agreement, including the secretary of state for the Vatican - I can't under any circumstances believe that the - His Holiness, the Pope would agree by signing that agreement that the thirty-five nations have turned over to the Warsaw Pact nations the domination of the - Eastern Europe.
It just isn't true.
And if Mr. Carter alleges that His Holiness by signing that has done it, he is totally inaccurate.
Now, what has been accomplished by the Helsinki agreement?
Number one, we have an agreement where they notify us and we notify them of any uh - military maneuvers that are to be be undertaken.
They have done it.
In both cases where they've done so, there is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford administration.
 I don't believe, uh - Mr. Frankel that uh - the Yugoslavians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
I don't believe that the Rumanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
I don't believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
Each of those countries is independent, autonomous: it has its own territorial integrity and the United States does not concede that those countries are under the domination of the Soviet Union.
As a matter of fact, I visited Poland, Yugoslavia and Rumania to make certain that the people of those countries understood that the president of the United States and the people of the United are dedicated to their independence, their autonomy and their freedom.
 (chuckle) Well, in the first place, I'm not criticizing His Holiness the Pope.
I was talking about Mr. Ford.
The uh - fact is that secrecy has surrounded the decisions made by the Ford administration.
In the case of the Helsinki agreement - it may have been a good agreement at the beginning, but we have failed to enforce the so-called basket three part, which insures the right of people to migrate, to join their families, to be free, to speak out.
The Soviet Union is still jamming Radio Free Europe - Radio - uh- uh - Radio Free Europe is being jammed.
We've also seen a very serious uh - problem with the so-called Sonnenfeldt document, which apparently Mr. Ford has just endorsed, which said that there's an organic linkage between the Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union.
And I would like to see Mr. Ford convince the Polish-Americans and the Czech-Americans and the Hungarian-Americans in this country that those countries don't live under the domination and supervision of the Soviet Union behind the Iron - uh - Curtain.
We also have seen Mr. Ford exclude himself from access to the public.
He hasn't had a tough cross-examination-type press conference in over thirty days.
One press conference he had without sound.
He's also shown a weakness in yielding to pressure.
The Soviet Union, for instance, put pressure on Mr. Ford and he refused to see a symbol of human freedom recognized around the world, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.
The Arabs have put pressure on Mr. Ford, and he's yielded, and has permitted a boycott by the Arab countries of American businesses who trade with Israel, or who have American Jews owning or taking part in the management of American - companies.
His own secretary of commerce had to be subpoenaed by the Congress to reveal the names of businesses who were subject to this boycott.
They didn't volunteer the information.
He had to be subpoenaed.
And the last thing I'd like to say is this: This grain deal with the Soviet Union in '72 was terrible, and Mr. Ford made up for it with three embargoes, one against our own ally in Japan.
That's not the way to run our foreign policy, including international trade.
 I would never single out food as a trade embargo item.
If I ever decided to impose an embargo because of a crisis in international relationships, it would include all shipments of all equipment.
For instance, if the Arab countries ever again declare an embargo against our nation on oil I would consider that not a military but an economic declaration of war, and I would respond instantly and in kind.
I would not ship that Arab country anything - no weapons, no spare parts for weapons, no oil-drilling rigs, no oil pipe, no nothing.
I wouldn't single out just food.
Another thing that I'd like to say is this: In our international trade, as I said in my op- opening statement, we have become the arms merchant of the world.
When this Republican administration came into office we were shipping about $1 billion worth of arms overseas, now ten to twelve billion dollars worth of arms overseas to countries that quite often use these weapons to fight each other.
The shift in emphasis has been very disturbing to me, speaking about the Middle East.
Under the last Democratic administration 60 percent of all weapons that went into the Middle East were for Israel.
Nowadays - 75 percent were for Israel before.
Now 60 percent go to the Arab countries, and this does not include Iran.
If you include Iran, our present shipment of weapons to the Middle East, only 20 percent goes to Israel.
This is a deviation from idealism; it's a deviation from a commitment to our major ally in the Middle East, which is Israel; it's a yielding to economic pressure on the part of the Arabs on the oil issue; and it's also a tremendous indication that under the Ford administration we have not addressed the energy policy adequately.
We still have no comprehensive energy policy in this country.
And it's an overall sign of weakness.
When we are weak at home economically - high unemployment, high inflation, a confused government, a wasteful defense establishment, this encourages the kind of pressure that's been put on us successfully.
It would've been inconceivable ten - fifteen years ago, for us to be brought to our knees with an Arab oil embargo.
But it was done three years ago and they're still putting pressure on us from the Arab countries to our discredit around the world.
These are the weaknesses that I see, and I believe it's not just a matter of idealism.
It's a matter of being tough.
It's a matter of being strong.
It's a matter of being consistent.
Our priorities ought to be first of all to meet our own military needs, secondly to meet the needs of our allies and friends, and only then should we ship military equipment to foreign countries.
As a matter of fact, Iran is gonna get eighty F-14s before we even meet our own Air Force orders for F-l4s.
And the shipment of Spruance-class destroyers to Iran are much more highly sophisticated than the Spruance-class destroyers that are present being delivered to our own Navy.
This is ridiculous and it ought to be changed.
 If - Iran is not an Arab country, as you know, it is a Moslem country - but if Saudi Arabia should declare an oil embargo against us, then I would consider that an economic declaration of war.
And I would make sure that the uh - Saudis understood this ahead of time so there would be no doubt in their mind.
I think under those circumstances they would refrain from pushing us to our knees as they did in 1973 with their previous oil embargo.
 Governor Carter uh - apparently doesn't realize that since I've been president we have sold to the Israelis over $4 billion in military hardware.
We have made available to the Israelis over 45 percent of the total economic and military aid since the establishment of Israel twenty-seven years ago.
So the Ford administration has done a good job in helping our good ally, Israel, and we're dedicated to the survival and security of Israel.
I believe that Governor Carter doesn't realize the need and necessity for arms sales to Iran.
He indicates he would not make those.
Iran is bordered very extensively by the Soviet Union.
Iran has Iraq as one of its neighbors.
The Soviet Union and the Communist-dominated government of Iraq are neighbors of Iran, and Iran is an ally of the United States.
It's my strong feeling that we ought to sell arms to Iran for its own national security, and as an ally - a strong ally of the United States.
The history of our relationship with Iran goes back to the days of President Truman when he decided that it was vitally necessary for our own security as well as that of Iran, that we should help that country, and Iran has been a good ally.
In 1973 when there was an oil embargo, Iran did not participate.
Iran continued to sell oil to the United States.
I believe that it's in our interest and in the interest of Israel and Iran, and Saudi Arabia, for the United States to sell arms to those countries.
It's for their security as well as ours.
 Our relationship with the People's Republic of China is based upon the Shanghai Communique, of 1972, and that communique, calls for the normalization of relations between the United States and the People's Republic.
It doesn't set a times schedule.
It doesn't uh - make a determination as to how uh - that relationship should be achieved in relationship to our current uhh - diplomatic recognition and obligations to the Taiwanese Government.
The Shanghai Communique, does say that the differences between the People's Republic on the one hand and Taiwan on the other shall be settled by peaceful means.
The net result is this administration, and during my time as the president for the next four years, we will continue to move for normalization of relations in the traditional sense, and we will insist that the disputes between Taiwan and the People's Republic be settled peacefully, as was agreed in the Shanghai Communique, of 1972.
The Ford administration will not let down, will not eliminate or forget our obligation to the people of Taiwan.
We feel that there must be a continued obligation to the people, the some nineteen or twenty million people in Taiwan.
And as we move during the next four years, those will be the policies of this administration.
 There is no policy of this government to give to the People's Republic, or to sell to the People's Republic of China, military equipment.
I do not believe that we, the United States, should sell, give or otherwise transfer military hardware to the People's Republic of China, or any other Communist nation, such as the Soviet Union and the like.
 Well, I'd like to go back just one moment to the previous question, where uh - Mr. Ford, I think, confused the issue by trying to say that we are shipping Israel 40 percent of our aid.
As a matter of fact, during this current year uh we are shipping Iran, or have contracted to ship to Iran, about seven and a half billion dollars worth of arms and also to Saudi Arabia, about seven and a half billion dollars worth of arms.
Also in 1975, we almost brought Israel to their knees after the uh - Yom Kippur War by the so-called reassessment of our relationship to Israel.
We in effect tried to make Israel the scapegoat for the problems in the Middle East.
And this weakened our relationships with Israel a great deal and put a cloud on the total commitment that our people feel toward the Israelis.
There ought to be a clear, unequivocal commitment without change to Israel.
In the Far East I think we need to continue to be uh - strong and uh - I would certainly uh - pursue the uh - normalization of uh - relationships with the People's Republic of China.
We opened a great opportunity in l972, which has pretty well been frittered - frit- frittered away under Mr. Ford, that ought to be a constant uh - inclination toward - uh - toward friendship.
But I would never let that friendship with the People's Republic of China stand in the way of the preservation of the independence and freedom of the people on Taiwan.
 Well, always in the past we've had an ability to have a strong defense and also have - to have a strong uh - domestic economy, and also to be strong in our reputation and influence within the community of nations.
These uh - characteristics of our country have been endangered under Mr. Ford.
We're no longer respected in a showdown vote in the United Nations or in - in any other international council we're lucky to get 20 percent of the other nations to vote with us.
Our allies feel that we've neglected them.
The so-called Nixon shock against Japan had weakened our relationships there.
Under this administration we've also had an inclination to keep separate the European countries, thinking that if they are separate, then we can dominate them and proceed with our secret, Lone Ranger-type diplomatic efforts.
I would uh - also like to point out that we, in this country, have let our economy go down the drain.
The worst inflation since the Great Depression.
The highest unemployment of any developed nation of the world.
We have a higher unemployment rate in this country than Great Britain, and West Germany.
Our unemployment rate is twice as high as it is in Italy; it's three or four times as high as it is - as it is in Japan.
And that terrible circumstance in this country is exported overseas.
We comprise about 30 percent of the world's economic trade power influence.
And when we're weak at home - weaker than all our allies - that weakness weakens the whole free world.
So strong economy is very important.
Another thing that we need to do is to reestablish the good relationships that we ought to have between the United States and our natural allies and friends.
They have felt neglected.
And using that base of strength, and using the idealism, the honesty, the predictability, the commitment, the integrity of our own country, that's where our strength lies.
And that would permit us to deal with the developing nations in a position of strength.
Under this administration we've had a continuation of the so-called balance of power politics, where everything is looked on as a struggle between us on the one side, the Soviet Union on the other.
Our allies - the smaller countries get trampled in the rush.
What we need is to try to seek individualized bilateral relationships with countries, regardless of their size, and to establish world-order politics, which means that we want to preserve peace through strength.
We also wanna revert back to the stature and the respect that our country had in previous administrations.
Now, I can't say when this can come.
But I can guarantee it will not come if Gerald Ford is reelected and this present policy is continued; it will come if I'm elected.
 Well let me say very quickly that under President Johnson, in spite of the massive investment in the Vietnam War, he turned over a balanced budget to Mr. Nixon.
The unemployment rate was less than 4 percent.
The inflation rate under Kennedy and Johnson was about 2 percent - one-third what it is under this administration.
So we did have at that time with good management, the ability to do both.
I don't think that anybody can say that Johnson and Kennedy neglected the poor and the destitute people in this country or around the world.
But I can say this: The number one responsibility of any president, above all else, is to guarantee the security of our nation - an ability to be free of the threat of attack, or blackmail and to carry out our obligations to our allies and friends, and to carry out a legitimate foreign policy.
They must go hand in hand, but the security of this nation has got to come first.
 Let me say very categorically you cannot maintain the security of the United States with the kind of defense budget cuts that Governor Carter has indicated.
In 1975 he wanted to cut the budget $15 billion.
He's now down to a figure of five to seven billion dollars.
Reductions of that kind will not permit the United States to be strong enough to deter aggression and maintain the peace.
Governor Carter apparently doesn't know the facts.
As soon as I became president, I initiated a meeting with the NATO heads of state and met with them in Brussels to discuss how we could improve the re- defense relationship in Western Europe.
In uh - November of 1975 I met with the leaders of the five industrial nations in France for the purpose of seeing what we could do acting together to meet the problems of uh - the coming recession.
In Puerto Rico this year, I met with six of the leading industrial nations' heads of state to meet the problem of inflation so we would be able to solve it before it got out of hand.
I have met with the heads of government bilaterally as well as multilaterally.
Our relations with Japan have never been better.
I was the first United States president to visit Japan.
And we uh - had the emperor of Japan here this uh - past year and the net result is Japan and the United States are working more closely together now than at any time in the history of our relationship.
You can go around the world - and let me take Israel for example.
Just recently, President Rabin said that our relations were never better.
 First we have to understand that SALT I expires October third 1977.
Uh - Mr. Brezhnev and I met in Vladivostok in December of 1974 for the purpose of trying to take the initial step so we could have a SALT II agreement that would go to l985.
As I indicated earlier, we did agree on a twenty-four-hundred limitation on uh - uh - launchers of ballistic missiles.
Uh - that would mean a cutback in the Soviet program; it would not interfere with our own program.
At the same time, we put a limitation of thirteen hundred and twenty on MIRVs.
Our technicians have been working since that time in Geneva, trying to put into technical language a - an agreement that can be verified by both parties.
In the meantime, there has developed the problem of the Soviet Backfire - their high-performance aircraft which they say is not a long-range aircraft and which some of our people say is a intercontinental aircraft.
In the interim, there has been the development on our part primarily, the cruise missiles; cruise missiles that could be launched from land-based mobile installations; cruise missiles that could be launched - launched from high-performance aircraft, like the B-52s or the B-1s, which I hope we proceed with; cruise missiles which could be launched from either surface or submarine uh - naval vessels.
Those gray-area weapons systems are creating some problems in a - the agreement for a SALT II negotiation.
But I can say that I am dedicated to proceeding, and I met just last week with the foreign minister of the Soviet Union, and he indicated to me that uh - the Soviet Union was interested in narrowing the differences and making a realistic and a sound compromise.
I hope and trust, in the best interest of both countries, and in the best interests of all people throughout this globe, that the Soviet Union and the United States can make a mutually beneficial agreement.
Because if we do not and SALT I expires on October three, 1977, you will unleash again an all-out nuclear arms race with the potential of a nuclear holocaust of unbelievable dimensions.
So it's the obligation of the president to do just that, and I intend to do so.
 I believe that the cruise missiles which we are now developing in research and development across the spectrum from air, from the sea, or from the land, uh - can be uh - included within a SALT II agreement.
They are a new weapons system that has a great potential, both conventional and nuclear armed.
At the same time, we have to make certain that the Soviet Union's Backfire, which they claim is not an intercontinental aircraft and which some of our people contend is, must also be included if we are to get the kind of agreement which is in the best interest of both countries.
And I really believe that it - it's far better for us and for the Soviet Union, and more importantly for the people around the world, that these two superpowers find an answer for a SALT II agreement before October three, 1977.
I think good will on both parts, hard bargaining by both parties and a reasonable compromise will be in the best interests of all parties.
 Well, Mr. Ford acts like he's uh - running for president for the first time.
He's been in office two years, and there has been absolutely no progress made toward a new SALT agreement.
He has learned the date of the expiration of SALT I, apparently.
We've seen, in this world, a development of a tremendous threat to us.
As a nuclear engineer myself, I know the limitations and capabilities of atomic power.
I also - know that as far as the human beings on this earth are concerned that the nonproliferation of atomic weapons is number one.
Only the last few days with the election approaching, has Mr. Ford taken any interest in a nonproliferation movement.
I advocated last May in a speech at the United Nations that we move immediately as a nation to declare a complete moratorium on the testing of all nuclear devices, both weapons and peaceful devices; that we not ship any more atomic fuel to a country that refuses to comply with strict controls over the waste which can be reprocessed into explosives.
I've also advocated that we stop the sale by Germany and France of - processing plants for Pakistan and Brazil.
Mr. Ford hasn't moved on this.
We also need to provide an adequate supply of enriched uranium.
Mr. Ford, again, under pressure from the atomic energy lobby, has insisted that this reprocessing or rather re-en- enrichment be done by private industry and not by the existing uh - government uh - plants.
This kind of confusion and absence of leadership has let us drift now for two years with a constantly increasing threat of atomic weapons throughout the world.
We now have five nations that have atomic bombs that we know about.
If we continue under Mr. Ford's policy by 1985 or '90 we'll have twenty nations that have the capability of exploding atomic weapons.
This has got to be stopped.
That is one of the major challenges and major undertakings that I will assume as the next president.
 No, it's not just campaign rhetoric.
I think that militarily we are as strong as any nation on earth.
I think we got to stay that way and continue to increase our capabilities to meet any potential threat.
But as far as strength derived from commitment to principles, as far as strength derived from the unity within our country, as far as strength derived from the people, the Congress, the secretary of state, the president, sharing in the evolution and carrying-out of a foreign policy, as far as strength derived from the respect of our own allies and friends, their assurance that we will be staunch in our commitment, that we will not deviate and that we'll give them adequate attention, as far as - as strength derived from doing what's right - caring for the poor, providing food, becoming the breadbasket of the world instead of the arms merchant of the world - in those respects, we're not strong.
Also, we'll never be strong again overseas, unless we're strong at home.
And with our economy in such terrible disarray and getting worse by the month.
We've got five-hundred thousand more Americans unemployed today than we had three months ago.
We've got two and a half million more Americans out of work now than we had when Mr. Ford took office.
This kind of deterioration in our economic strength is bound to weaken us around the world.
And we not only have uh problems at home but we export those problems overseas.
So as far as the respect of our own people toward our own government, as far as participating in the shaping of uh - concepts and commitments, as far as the trust of our country among the nations of the world, as far as dependence of our country in meeting the needs and obligations that we've expressed to our allies, as far as the respect of our country - even among our potential adversaries - we are weak.
Potentially we're strong.
Under this administration that strength has not been realized.
 Governor Carter uh - brags about the unemployment during Democratic administrations and condemns the unemployment at the present time.
I must remind him that we're at peace and during the period that he brags about unemployment being low, the United States was at war.
Now let me correct one other comment that uh - Governor Carter has made.
I have recommended to the Congress that we develop the uranium enrichment plant at Portsmouth, Ohio, which is a publicly owned - U.S. government facility and have indicated that the private program which would follow on in Alabama is one that may or may not uhh - be constructed.
But I am committed to the one at Portsmouth, Ohio.
The governor also talks about morality in foreign policy.
The foreign policy of the United States meets the highest standards of morality.
What is more moral than peace, and the United States is at peace today?
What is more moral in foreign policy than for the administration to take the lead in the World Food Conference in Rome in 1974 when the United States committed six million metric tons of food - over 60 percent of the food committed for the disadvantaged and underdeveloped nations of the world?
The Ford administration wants to eradicate hunger and disease in our underdeveloped countries throughout the world.
What is more moral than for the United States under the Ford administration to take the lead in southern Africa, in the Middle East?
Those are initiatives in foreign policy which are of the highest moral standard and that is indicative of the foreign policy of this country.
 I believe that uh - our foreign policy must express the highest standards of morality.
And the initiatives that we took in southern Africa are the best examples of what this administration is doing and will continue to do in the next four years.
If the United States had not moved when we did in southern Africa, there's no doubt there would have been an acceleration of bloodshed in that tragic part of the world.
If we had not taken our initiative, it's very, very possible that uh - the government of Rhodesia would have been overrun and that the Soviet Union and the Cubans would have dominated uh - southern Africa.
So the United States, seeking to preserve the principle of self-determination, to eliminate the possibility of bloodshed, to protect the rights of the minority as we insisted upon the rights of the majority, uh - I believe followed the good conscience of the American people in foreign policy.
And I believe that we used our skill.
Secretary of State Kissinger has done a superb job in working with the black African nations, the so-called front-line nations.
He has done a superb job in getting the prime minister of South Africa, Mr. Vorster, to agree that the time had come for a solution to the problem of Rhodesia.
Secretary Kissinger, in his meeting with uh - Prime Minister Smith of Rhodesia, was able to convince him that it was in the best interests of whites as well as blacks in Rhodesia to find an answer for a transitional government and then a majority government.
This is a perfect example of the kind of leadership that the United States, under this administration, has taken.
And I can assure you that this administration will follow that high moral principle in our future efforts in foreign policy, including our efforts in the Middle East where it is vitally important because the Middle East is the crossroads of the world.
There've been more disputes in its area where there's more volatility than any other place in the world.
But because Arab nations and the Israelis trust the United States, we were able to take the lead in the Sinai II Agreement.
And I can assure you that the United States will have the leadership role in moving toward a comprehensive settlement of the Middle Eastern problems, I hope and trust as soon as possible.
And we will do it with the highest moral principles.
 I would hope that as we move to one area of the world from another - and the United States must not spread itself too thinly - that was one of the problems that helped to create the circumstances in Vietnam - but as we as a nation find that we are asked by the various parties, either one nation against another or individuals within a nation, that the United States will take the leadership and try to resolve the differences.
Let me take uh - South Korea as an example.
I have personally told President Pack that the United States does not condone the kind of repressive measures that he has taken in that country.
But I think in all fairness and equity we have to recognize the problem that South Korea has.
On the north they have North Korea with five hundred thousand well-trained, well-equipped troops - they are supported by the People's Republic of China; they are supported by the Soviet Union.
South Korea faces a very delicate situation.
Now the United States, in this case, this administration, has recommended a year ago and we have reiterated it again this year, that the United States, South Korea, North Korea and the uh - People's Republic of China sit down at a conference table to resolve the problems of the Korean peninsula.
This is a leadership role that the United States under this administration is carrying out, and if we do it, and I think the opportunities and the possibilities are getting better, we will have solved many of the internal domestic problems that exist in South Korea at the present time.
 I notice that Mr. Ford didn't comment on the uh - prisons in Chile.
This is an - a typical example, maybe of many others, where this administration overthrew an elected government and helped to establish a military dictatorship.
This has not been an ancient history story.
Last year under Mr. Ford, of all the Food for Peace that went to South America, 85 percent went to the military dictatorship in Chile.
Another point I wanna make is this.
He says we have to move from one area of the world to another.
That's one of the problems with this administration's so-called shuttle diplomacy.
While the secretary of state's in one country, there are almost a hundred and fifty others that are wondering what we're gonna do next, what will be the next secret agreement.
We don't have a comprehensive understandable foreign policy that deals with world problems or even regional problems.
Another thing that concerned me was what Mr. Ford said about unemployment, that - insinuating that under Johnson and Kennedy that unemployment could only be held down when this country is at war.
Karl Marx said that the free enterprise system in a democracy can only continue to exist when they are at war or preparing far war.
Karl Marx was the grandfather of Communism.
I don't agree with that statement.
I hope Mr. Ford doesn't either.
He has put pressure on the Congress - and I don't believe Mr. Ford would even deny this - to hold up on nonproliferation legislation until the Congress agreed for an $8 billion program for private industry to start producing enriched uranium.
And the last thing I wanna make is this.
He talks about peace and I'm thankful for peace.
We were peaceful when Mr. Ford went into office.
But he and Mr. Kissinger and others tried to start a new Vietnam in Angola, and it was only the outcry of the American people and the Congress when their secret deal was discovered that prevented our involvement in that conflagration which was taking place there.
 Well, here again, uh - the Panamanian question is one that's been confused by Mr. Ford.
Uh - he had directed his uh - diplomatic relation - uh - uh - representative to yield to the Panamanians full sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone at the end of a certain period of time.
When Mr. Reagan raised this uh - question in Florida uh - Mr. Ford not only disavowed his instructions, but he also even dropped, parenthetically, the use of the word "detente."
I would never give up complete control or practical control of the Panama Canal Zone, but I would continue to negotiate with the Panamanians.
When the original treaty was signed back in the early 1900s, when Theodore Roosevelt was president, Panama retained sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone.
We retained control as though we had sovereignty.
Now I would be willing to go ahead with negotiations.
I believe that we could share more fully responsibilities for the Panama Canal Zone with Panama.
I would be willing to continue to raise the payment for shipment of goods through the Panama Canal Zone.
I might even be willing to reduce to some degree our military emplacements in the Panama Canal Zane, but I would not relinquish practical control of the Panama Canal Zane any time in the foreseeable future.
 The United States must and will maintain complete access to the Panama Canal.
The United States must maintain a defense capability of the Panama Canal.
And the United States will maintain our national security interest in the Panama Canal.
The negotiations far the Panama Canal started under President Johnson and have continued up to the present time.
I believe those negotiations should continue.
But there are certain guidelines that must be followed, and I've just defined them.
Let me take just a minute to comment on something that Governor Carter said.
On non - nu- oh - uh - nonproliferation, in May of l975, I called for a conference of uh - nuclear suppliers.
That conference has met six times.
In May of this year, Governor Carter took the first initiative, approximately twelve months after I had taken my initiative a year ago.
 The White House did not uh - prevent the release of that report.
On July twelfth of this year, we gave full permission for the release of that report.
I was very disappointed in the fact that the uh - GAO released that report because I think it interjected political partisan politics at the present time.
But let me comment on the report.
Somebody who sits in Washington, D.C., eighteen months after the Mayaguez incident, can be a very good grandstand quarterback.
And let me make another observation.
This morning, I got a call from the skipper of the Mayaguez.
He was furious because he told me that it was the action of me, President Ford, that saved the lives of the crew of the Mayaguez.
And I can assure you that if we had not taken the strong and forceful action that we did, we would have been uh - criticized very, very uh - severely for sitting back and not moving.
Captain Miller is thankful.
The crew is thankful.
We did the right thing.
It seems to me that those who sit in Washington eighteen months after the incident are not the best judges of the decision-making process that had to be made by the National Security Council and by myself at the time the incident was developing in the Pacific.
Let me assure you that we made every possible overture to the People's Republic of China and through them to the Cambodian Government.
We made uh - diplomatic uh - protests to the Cambodian government through the United Nations.
Every possible diplomatic means was utilized.
But at the same time, I had a responsibility, and so did the National Security Coun- Council, to meet the problem at hand.
And we handled it responsibly and I think Captain Miller's testimony to that effect is the best evidence.
 Well, I'm reluctant to uh comment on the recent report - I haven't read it.
I think the American people have only one - uh requirement - that the facts about Mayaguez be given to them accurately and completely.
Mr. Ford has been there for eighteen months.
He had the facts that were released today immediately after the Mayaguez incident.
I understand that the report today is accurate.
Mr. Ford has said, I believe, that it was accurate, and that the White House made no attempt to block the issuing of that report.
I don't know if that's exactly accurate or not.
I understand that both the - the uh - Department of State and the Defense Department have approved the accuracy of today's report, or yesterday's report, and also the National Security Agency.
I don't know what was right, or what was wrong, or what was done.
The only thing I believe is that whatever the - the knowledge was that Mr. Ford had should have been given to the American people eighteen months ago, immediately after the Mayaguez uh - incident occurred.
This is uh - what the American people want.
When something happens that endangers our security, or when something happens that threatens our stature in the world, or when American people are endangered by the actions of a foreign country, uh - just forty uh sailors on the Mayaguez, we obviously have to move aggressively and quickly to rescue them.
But then after the immediate action is taken, I believe the president has an obligation to tell the American people the truth and not wait eighteen months later for the report to be issued.
 I believe that the boycott of American businesses by the Arab countries because those businesses trade with Israel or because they have American Jews who are owners or directors in the company is an absolute disgrace.
This is the first time that I've - remember in the history of our country when we've let a foreign country circumvent or change our Bill of Rights.
I'll do everything I can as president to stop the boycott of American businesses by the Arab countries.
It's not a matter of diplomacy or trade with me.
It's a matter of morality.
And I don't believe that Arab countries will pursue it when we have a strong president who will protect the integrity of our country, the commitment of our Constitution and Bill of Rights and protect people in this country who happen to be Jews.
It may later be Catholics; it may be - later be Baptists who are threatened by some foreign country.
But we ought to stand staunch.
And I think it's a disgrace that so far Mr. Ford's administration has blocked the passage of legislation that would've revealed by law every instance of the boycott and it would've prevented the boycott from continuing.
 Again Governor Carter is inaccurate.
The Arab boycott action was first taken in 1952.
And in November of 1975 I was the first president to order the executive branch to take action, affirmative action, through the Department of Commerce and other cabinet departments, to make certain that no American businessman or business organization should discriminate against Jews because of an Arab boycott.
And I might add that uh - my administration - and I'm very proud of it - is the first administration that has taken an antitrust action against companies in this country that have allegedly cooperated with the Arab boycott.
Just on Monday of this week I signed a tax bill that included an amendment that would prevent companies in the United States from taking a tax deduction if they have in any way whatsoever cooperated with the Arab boycott.
And last week when we were trying to get the Export Administration Act through the Congress - necessary legislation - my administration went to Capitol Hill and tried to convince the House and the Senate that we should have an amendment on that legislation which would take strong and effective action against those who uh - participate or cooperate with the Arab uh boycott.
One other point.
Because the Congress failed to act, I am going to announce tomorrow that the Department of Commerce will disclose those companies that have uh - participated in the Arab boycott.
This is something that we can do; the Congress failed to do it, and we intend to do it.
 Let me restate uh - our policy.
As long as Vietnam, North Vietnam, does not give us a full and complete accounting of our missing in action, I will never uh - go along with the admission of Vietnam to the United Nations.
If they do give us a bona fide, complete uh - accounting of the eight hundred MIA's, then I believe that the United States should begin negotiations for the uh - admission of Vietnam to the United Nations.
But not until they have given us the full accounting of our MIAs.
 One of the uh - most embarrassing uh - failures of the Ford administration, and one that touches specifically on human rights, is his refusal to appoint a presidential commission to go to Vietnam, to go to Laos, to go to Cambodia and try to trade for the release of information about those who are missing in action in those wars.
This is what the families of MIAs want.
So far, Mr. Ford has not done it.
We've had several fragmentary efforts by members of the Congress and by - by private citizens.
Several months ago the Vietnam government said, "We are ready to sit down and negotiate for release of information on MIAs.
So far, Mr. Ford has not responded.
I would never normalize relationships with Vietnam, nor permit them to join the United Nations until they've taken this action.
But that's not enough.
We need to have an active and aggressive action on the part of the president, the leader of his country, to seek out every possible way to get that information which has kept the MIA families in despair and doubt, and Mr. Ford has just not done it.
 The purpose of this debate and the outcome of the election will determine three basic things: Leadership, upholding the principles of our country, and proper priorities and commitments for the future.
This election will also determine what kind of world we leave our children.
Will it be a nightmare world threatened with the proliferation of atomic bombs, not just in five major countries but dozens of smaller countries that have been permitted to develop atomic weapons because of a failure of our top leadership to stop proliferation?
Will we have a world of hunger and - and hatred, and will we be living in an armed camp stripped of our friendship and allies hiding behind a tight defense that's been drawn in around us because we are fearful of the outside world?
Will we have a government of secrecy that excludes the American people from participation in making basic decisions and therefore covers up mistakes and makes it possible for our government - our government - to depart from the principles of our Constitution and Bill of Rights?
Or will we have a world of peace with the threat of atomic weapons eliminated, with full trade, with our people at work, inflation controlled, openness in government, our people proud once again, Congress, citizens, president, secretary of state working in harmony and unity toward a common future?
Or world where people have enough to eat and a world where we care about those who don't?
Can we become a breadbasket of the world instead of the arms merchant of the world?
I believe we can and we ought to.
Now we've been hurt in recent years in this country.
In the aftermath of Vietnam, Cambodia, Chile, Pakistan, Angola, Watergate, CIA, we've been hurt.
Our people feel that we've lost something precious.
That's not necessary.
I wanna see our nation - return to a posture and an image and a standard to make us proud once again.
I remember the world with NATO, and the world of Point Four, and the world of the Marshall Plan, and the world of the Peace Corps.
Why can't we have that once again?
We ought to be a beacon for nations who search for peace and who search for freedom, who search for individual liberty, who search for basic human rights.
We haven't been lately.
We can be once again.
We'll never have that world leadership until we are strong at home, and we can have that strength if we return to the basic principles.
It ought not to be a strength of bombast and threats.
It ought to be a quiet strength based on the integrity of our people, the vision of the Constitution, an in- innate strong will and purpose that God's given us in the greatest nation on earth - the United States.
 As we have seen tonight, foreign policy and defense policy are difficult and complex issues.
We can debate methods, we can debate one decision or another, but there are two uh things which cannot be debated - experience and results.
In the last two years, I have made policy decisions involving - long-range difficulties and policies and made day-to-day judgments not only as president of the United States but as the leader of the free world What is the result of that leadership?
America is strong.
America is free.
America is respected.
Not a single young American today is fighting or dying on any foreign battlefield.
America is at peace and with freedom.
Thank you, and good night.
 I don't know what the differences might be, because I don't know what Mr. Carter's policies are.
I do know what he has said about mine.
And I'm only here to tell you that I believe with all my heart that our first priority must be world peace, and that use of force is always and only a last resort, when everything else has failed, and then only with regard to our national security.
Now, I believe, also, that this meeting this mission, this responsibility for preserving the peace, which I believe is a responsibility peculiar to our country, and that we cannot shirk our responsibility as a leader of the free world because we're the only ones that can do it.
Therefore, the burden of maintaining the peace falls on us.
And to maintain that peace requires strength.
America has never gotten in a war because we were too strong.
We can get into a war by letting events get out of hand, as they have in the last three and a half years under the foreign policies of this Administration of Mr. Carter's, until we're faced each time with a crisis.
And good management in preserving the peace requires that we control the events and try to intercept before they become a crisis.
I have seen four wars in my lifetime.
I'm a father of sons; I have a grandson.
I don't ever want to see another generation of young Americans bleed their lives into sandy beachheads in the Pacific, or rice paddies and jungles in the in Asia or the muddy battlefields of Europe.
 Mr. Stone, I have submitted an economic plan that I have worked out in concert with a number of fine economists in this country, all of whom approve it, and believe that over a five year projection, this plan can permit the extra spending for needed refurbishing of our defensive posture, that it can provide for a balanced budget by 1983 if not earlier, and that we can afford - along with the cuts that I have proposed in Government.
spending - we can afford the tax cuts I have proposed and probably mainly because Mr. Carter's economic policy has built into the next five years, and on beyond that, a tax increase that will be taking $86 billion more out of the people's pockets than was taken this year.
And my tax cut does not come close to eliminating that $86 billion increase.
I'm only reducing the amount of the increase.
In other words, what I'm talking about is not putting government back to getting less money than government's been getting, but simply cutting the increase in in spending.
 Mr. Stone, I've had to make thousands of decisions since I've been President, serving in the Oval Office.
And with each one of those decisions that affect the future of my country, I have learned in the process.
I think I'm a much wiser and more experienced man than I was when I debated four years ago against President Ford.
I've also learned that there are no simple answers to complicated questions.
H. L. Mencken said that for every problem there's a simple answer.
It would be neat and plausible and wrong.
The fact is that this nation, in the eight years before I became President, had its own military strength decreased.
Seven out of eight years, the budget commitments for defense went down, 37% in all.
Since I've been in office, we've had a steady, carefully planned, methodical but, very effective increase in our commitment for defense.
But what we've done is use that enormous power and prestige and military strength of the United States to preserve the peace.
We've not only kept peace for our own country, but we've been able to extend the benefits of peace to others.
In the Middle East, we've worked for a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, successfully, and have tied ourselves together with Israel and Egypt in a common defense capability.
This is a very good step forward for our nation's security, and we'll continue to do as we have done in the past.
I might also add that there are decisions that are made in the Oval Office by every President which are profound in nature.
There are always trouble spots in the world, and how those troubled areas are addressed by a President alone in that Oval Office affects our nation directly, the involvement of the United States and also our American interests.
That is a basic decision that has to be made so frequently, by every President who serves.
That is what I have tried to do successfully by keeping our country at peace.
 Mr. Stone, in my State of the Union address earlier this year, I pointed out that any threat to the stability or security of the Persian Gulf would be a threat to the security of our own country.
In the past, we have not had an adequate military presence in that region.
Now we have two major carrier task forces.
We have access to facilities in five different areas of that region.
And we've made it clear that working with our allies and others, that we are prepared to address any foreseeable eventuality which might interrupt commerce with that crucial area of the world.
But in doing this, we have made sure that we address this question peacefully, not injecting American military forces into combat, but letting the strength of our nation be felt in a beneficial way.
This, I believe, has assured that our interests will be protected in the Persian Gulf region, as we have done in the Middle East and throughout the world.
 Well yes, I question the figure about the decline in defense spending under the two previous Administrations in the preceding eight years to this Administration.
I would call to your attention that we were in a war that wound down during those eight years, which of course made a change in military spending because of turning from war to peace.
I also would like to point out that Republican presidents in those years, faced with a Democratic majority in both houses of the Congress, found that their requests for defense budgets were very often cut.
Now, Gerald Ford left a five-year projected plan for a military build-up to restore our defenses, and President Carter's administration reduced that by 38%, cut 60 ships out of the Navy building program that had been proposed, and stopped the the B-l, delayed the cruise missile, stopped the production line for the Minuteman missile, stopped the Trident or delayed the Trident submarine, and now is planning a mobile military force that can be delivered to various spots in the world which does make me question his assaults on whether I am the one who is quick to look for use of force.
 Well, there are various elements of defense.
One is to control nuclear weapons, which I hope we'll get to later on because that is the most important single issue in this campaign.
Another one is how to address troubled areas of the world.
I think, habitually, Governor Reagan has advocated the injection of military forces into troubled areas, when I and my predecessors - both Democrats and Republicans - have advocated resolving those troubles in those difficult areas of the world peacefully, diplomatically, and through negotiation.
In addition to that, the build-up of military forces is good for our country because we've got to have military strength to preserve the peace.
But I'll always remember that the best weapons are the ones that are never fired in combat, and the best soldier is one who never has to lay his life down on the field of battle.
Strength is imperative for peace, but the two must go hand in hand.
 Again it's important to put the situation in perspective.
In 1974, we had a so-called oil shock, wherein the price of OPEC oil was raised to an extraordinary degree.
We had an even worse oil shock in 1979.
In 1974, we had the worst recession, the deepest and most penetrating recession since the Second World War.
The recession that resulted this time was the briefest since the Second World War.
In addition, we've brought down inflation.
Earlier this year, in the first quarter, we did have a very severe inflation pressure brought about by the OPEC price increase.
It averaged about 18% in the first quarter of this year.
In the second quarter, we had dropped it down to about 13%.
The most recent figures, the last three months, on the third quarter of this year, the inflation rate is 7% - still too high, but it illustrates very vividly that in addition to providing an enormous number of jobs - nine million new jobs in the last three and a half years - that the inflationary threat is still urgent on us.
I notice that Governor Reagan recently mentioned the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal.
which his own running mate, George Bush, described as voodoo economics, and said that it would result in a 30% inflation rate.
And Business Week, which is not a Democratic publication, said that this Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal - and I quote them, I think - was completely irresponsible and would result in inflationary pressures which would destroy this nation.
So our proposals are very sound and very carefully considered to stimulate jobs, to improve the industrial complex of this country, to create tools for American workers, and at the same time would be anti-inflationary in nature.
So to add nine million new jobs, to control inflation, and to plan for the future with an energy policy now intact as a foundation is our plan for the years ahead.
 Yes.
We have demanded that the American people sacrifice, and they have done very well.
As a matter of fact, we're importing today about one-third less oil from overseas than we did just a year ago.
We've had a 25% reduction since the first year I was in office.
At the same time, as I have said earlier, we have added about nine million net new jobs in that period of time - a record never before achieved.
Also, the new energy policy has been predicated on two factors: One is conservation, which requires sacrifice, and the other one, increase in production of American energy, which is going along very well - more coal this year than ever before in American history, more oil and gas wells drilled this year than ever before in history.
The new economic revitalization program that we have in mind, which will be implemented next year, would result in tax credits which would let business invest in new tools and new factories to create even more new jobs - about one million in the next two years.
And we also have planned a youth employment program which would encompass 600,000 jobs for young people.
This has already passed the House, and it has an excellent prospect to pass the Senate.
 Mr. Ellis, I think this idea that has been spawned here in our country that inflation somehow came upon us like a plague and therefore it's uncontrollable and no one can do anything about it, is entirely spurious and it's dangerous to say this to the people.
When Mr. Carter became President, inflation was 4.8%, as you said.
It had been cut in two by President Gerald Ford.
It is now running at 12.7%.
President Carter also has spoken of the new jobs created.
Well, we always, with the normal growth in our country and increase in population, increase the number of jobs.
But that can't hide the fact that there are eight million men and women out of work in America today, and two million of those lost their jobs in just the last few months.
Mr. Carter had also promised that he would not use unemployment as a tool to fight against inflation.
And yet, his 1980 economic message stated that we would reduce productivity and gross national product and increase unemployment in order to get a handle on inflation, because in January, at the beginning of the year, it was more than 18%.
Since then, he has blamed the people for inflation, OPEC, he has blamed the Federal Reserve system, he has blamed the lack of productivity of the American people, he has then accused the people of living too well and that we must share in scarcity, we must sacrifice and get used to doing with less.
We don't have inflation because the people are living too well.
We have inflation because the Government is living too well.
And the last statement, just a few days ago, was a speech to the effect that we have inflation because Government revenues have not kept pace with Government spending.
I see my time is running out here.
I'll have to get this out very fast.
Yes, you can lick inflation by increasing productivity and by decreasing the cost of government to the place that we have balanced budgets, and are no longer grinding out printing press money, flooding the market with it because the Government is spending more than it takes in.
And my economic plan calls for that.
The President's economic plan calls for increasing the taxes to the point that we finally take so much money away from the people that we can balance the budget in that way.
But we will have a very poor nation and a very unsound economy if we follow that path.
 Well.
most people, when they think about cutting Government spending, they think in terms of eliminating necessary programs or wiping out something, some service that Government is supposed to perform.
I believe that there is enough extravagance and fat in government.
As a matter of fact, one of the secretaries of HEW under Mr. Carter testified that he thought there was $7 billion worth of fraud and waste in welfare and in the medical programs associated with it.
We've had the Central Accounting.
Office estimate that there is probably tens of billions of dollars that is lost in fraud alone, and they have added that waste adds even more to that.
We have a program for a gradual reduction of Government spending based on these theories, and I have a task force now that has been working on where those cuts could be made.
I'm confident that it can be done and that it will reduce inflation because I did it in California.
And inflation went down below the national average in California when we returned the money to the people and reduced Government spending.
 Governor Reagan's proposal, the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal, is one of the most highly inflationary ideas that ever has been presented to the American public.
He would actually have to cut Government spending by at least $130 billion in order to balance the budget under this ridiculous proposal.
I notice that his task force that is working for his future plans had some of their ideas revealed in The Wall Street Journal this week.
One of those ideas was to repeal the minimum wage, and several times this year, Governor Reagan has said that the major cause of unemployment is the minimum wage.
This is a heartless kind of approach to the working families of our country, which is typical of many Republican leaders of the past, but, I think, has been accentuated under Governor Reagan.
In California - I'm surprised Governor Reagan brought this up - he had the three largest tax increases in the history of that state under his administration.
He more than doubled state spending while he was Governor - 122% increase - and had between a 20% and 30% increase in the number of employees
 in California.
Thank you, sir.
 Yes.
The figures that the President has just used about California is a distortion of the situation there, because while I was Governor of California, our spending in California increased less per capita than the spending in Georgia while Mr. Carter was Governor of Georgia in the same four years.
The size of government increased only one-sixth in California of what it increased in proportion to the population in Georgia.
And the idea that my tax-cut proposal is inflationary: I would like to ask the President why is it inflationary to let the people keep more of their money and spend it the way that they like, and it isn't inflationary to let him take that money and spend it the way he wants?
 I have been talking to a number of Congressmen who have much the same idea that I have, and that is that in the inner city areas, that in cooperation with the local government and the national Government, and using tax incentives and with cooperating with the private sector, that we have development zones.
Let the local entity, the city, declare this particular area, based on the standards of the percentage of people on welfare, unemployed, and so forth, in that area.
And then, through tax incentives, induce the creation of businesses providing jobs and so forth in those areas.
The elements of government through these tax incentives For example, a business that would not have, for a period of time, an increase in the property tax reflecting its development of the unused property that it was making wouldn't be any loss to the city because the city isn't getting any tax from that now.
And there would simply be a delay, and on the other hand, many of the people who would then be given jobs are presently wards of the Government and it wouldn't hurt to give them a tax incentive, because they... that wouldn't be costing Government anything either.
I think there are things to do in this regard.
I stood in the South Bronx on the exact spot that President Carter stood on in 1977.
You have to see it to believe it.
It looks like a bombed-out city - great, gaunt skeletons of buildings.
Windows smashed out, painted on one of them "Unkept promises;" on another, "Despair."
And this was the spot at which President Carter had promised that he was going to bring in a vast program to rebuild this department.
There are whole or this area there are whole blocks of land that are left bare, just bulldozed down flat.
And nothing has been done, and they are now charging to take tourists there to see this terrible desolation.
I talked to a man just briefly there who asked me one simple question: "Do I have reason to hope that I can someday take care of my family again?
Nothing has been done."
 I believe in it.
I am eternally optimistic, and I happen to believe that we've made great progress from the days when I was young and when this country didn't even know it had a racial problem.
I know those things can grow out of despair in an inner city, when there's hopelessness at home, lack of work, and so forth.
But I believe that all of us together, and I believe the Presidency is what Teddy Roosevelt said it was.
It's a bully pulpit.
And I think that something can be done from there, because a goal for all of us should be that one day, things will be done neither because of nor in spite of any of the differences between us - ethnic differences or racial differences, whatever they may be - that we will have total equal opportunity for all people.
And I would do everything I could in my power to bring that about.
 Thank you, Mr. Hilliard.
When I was campaigning in 1976, everywhere I went, the mayors and local officials were in despair about the rapidly deteriorating central cities of our nation.
We initiated a very fine urban renewal program, working with the mayors, the governors, and other interested officials.
This has been a very successful effort.
That's one of the main reasons that we've had such an increase in the number of people employed.
Of the nine million people put to work in new jobs since I've been in office, 1.3 million of those has been among black Americans, and another million among those who speak Spanish.
We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit, mass transit.
Under the windfall profits tax, we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country.
We also are pursuing housing programs.
We've had a 73% increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education.
These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders, particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that have been deteriorating so rapidly in the past.
It's very important to us that this be done with the full involvement of minority citizens.
I have brought into the top level, top levels of government, into the White House, into administrative offices of the Executive branch, into the judicial system, highly qualified black and Spanish citizens and women who in the past had been excluded.
I noticed that Governor Reagan said that when he was a young man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country.
Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem.
We have gone a long way toward correcting these problems, but we still have a long way to go.
 Ours is a nation of refugees, a nation of immigrants.
Almost all of our citizens came here from other lands and now have hopes, which are being realized, for a better life, preserving their ethnic commitments, their family structures, their religious beliefs, preserving their relationships with their relatives in foreign countries, but still holding themselves together in a very coherent society, which gives our nation its strength.
In the past, those minority groups have often been excluded from participation in the affairs of government.
Since I've been President, I've appointed, for instance, more than twice as many black Federal judges as all previous presidents in the history of this country.
I've done the same thing in the appointment of women, and also Spanish-speaking Americans.
To involve them in the administration of government and the feeling that they belong to the societal structure that makes decisions in the judiciary and in the executive branch is a very important commitment which I am trying to realize and will continue to do so in the future.
 Yes.
The President talks of Government programs, and they have their place.
But as governor, when I was at that end of the line and receiving some of these grants for Government programs, I saw that so many of them were dead-end.
They were public employment that these people who really want to get out into the private job market where there are jobs with a future.
Now, the President spoke a moment ago about that I was against the minimum wage.
I wish he could have been with me when I sat with a group of teenagers who were black, and who were telling me about their unemployment problems, and that it was the minimum wage that had done away with the jobs that they once could get.
And indeed, every time it has increased you will find there is an increase in minority unemployment among young people.
And therefore, I have been in favor of a separate minimum for them.
With regard to the great progress that has been made with this Government spending, the rate of black unemployment in Detroit, Michigan, is 56%.
 It's obvious that we still have a long way to go in fully incorporating the minority groups into the mainstream of American life.
We have made good progress, and there is no doubt in my mind that the commitment to unemployment compensation, the minimum wage, welfare, national health insurance, those kinds of commitments that have typified the Democratic party since ancient history in this country's political life are a very important element of the future.
In all those elements, Governor Reagan has repeatedly spoken out against them, which, to me, shows a very great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life.
This, to me, is a very important difference between him and me in this election, and I believe the American people will judge accordingly.
There is no doubt in my mind that in the downtown central cities, with the, with the new commitment on an energy policy, with a chance to revitalize homes and to make them more fuel efficient, with a chance for our synthetic fuels program, solar power, this will give us an additional opportunity for jobs which will pay rich dividends.
 Barbara, one of the blights on this world is the threat and the activities of terrorists.
At one of the recent economic summit conferences between myself and the other leaders of the western world, we committed ourselves to take strong action against terrorism.
Airplane hijacking was one of the elements of that commitment.
There is no doubt that we have seen in recent years - in recent months - additional acts of violence against Jews in France and, of course, against those who live in Israel, by the PLO and other terrorist organizations.
Ultimately, the most serious terrorist threat is if one of those radical nations, who believe in terrorism as a policy, should have atomic weapons.
Both I and all my predecessors have had a deep commitment to controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
In countries like Libya or Iraq, we have even alienated some of our closest trade partners because we have insisted upon the control of the spread of nuclear weapons to those potentially terrorist countries.
When Governor Reagan has been asked about that, he makes the very disturbing comment that non-proliferation, or the control of the spread of nuclear weapons, is none of our business.
And recently when he was asked specifically about Iraq, he said there is nothing we can do about it.
This ultimate terrorist threat is the most fearsome of all, and it's part of a pattern where our country must stand firm to control terrorism of all kinds.
 We will maintain our position of neutrality in the Iran and Iraq war.
We have no plans to sell additional materiel or goods to Iran, that might be of a warlike nature.
When I made my decision to stop all trade with Iran as a result of the taking of our hostages, I announced then, and have consistently maintained since then, that if the hostages are released safely, we would make delivery on those items which Iran owns - which they have bought and paid for - also, that the frozen Iranian assets would be released.
That's been a consistent policy, one I intend to carry out.
 Barbara, you've asked that question twice.
I think you ought to have at least one answer to it.
I have been accused lately of having a secret plan with regard to the hostages.
Now, this comes from an answer that I've made at least 50 times during this campaign to the press, when I am asked have you any ideas of what you would do if you were there?
And I said, well, yes.
And I think that anyone that's seeking this position, as well as other people, probably, have thought to themselves, what about this, what about that?
These are just ideas of what I would think of if I were in that position and had access to the information, and which I would know all the options that were open to me.
I have never answered the question, however; second, the one that says, well, tell me, what are some of those ideas?
First of all, I would be fearful that I might say something that was presently under way or in negotiations, and thus expose it and endanger the hostages, and sometimes, I think some of my ideas might require quiet diplomacy where you don't say in advance, or say to anyone, what it is you're thinking of doing.
Your question is difficult to answer, because, in the situation right now, no one wants to say anything that would inadvertently delay, in any way, the return of those hostages if there if there is a chance that they're coming home soon, or that might cause them harm.
What I do think should be done, once they are safely here with their families, and that tragedy is over - we've endured this humiliation for just lacking one week of a year now - then, I think, it is time for us to have a complete investigation as to the diplomatic efforts that were made in the beginning, why they have been there so long, and when they came home, what did we have to do in order to bring that about - what arrangements were made?
And I would suggest that Congress should hold such an investigation.
In the meantime, I'm going to continue praying that they'll carne home.
 The degree of unpopularity of a regime when the choice is total authoritarianism totalitarianism, I should say, in the alternative government, makes one wonder whether you are being helpful to the people.
And we've been guilty of that.
Because someone didn't meet exactly our standards of human rights, even though they were an ally of ours, instead of trying patiently to persuade them to change their ways, we have, in a number of instances, aided a revolutionary overthrow which results in complete totalitarianism, instead, for those people.
I think that this is a kind of a hypocritical policy when, at the same time, we're maintaining a detente with the one nation in the world where there are no human rights at all - the Soviet Union.
Now, there was a second phase in the Iranian affair in which we had something to do with that.
And that was, we had adequate warning that there was a threat to our embassy, and we could have done what other embassies did - either strengthen our security there, or remove our personnel before the kidnap and the takeover took place.
 I didn't hear any comment from Governor Reagan about what he would do to stop or reduce terrorism in the future.
What the Western allies did decide to do is to stop all air flights - commercial air flights - to any nation involved in terrorism or the hijacking of air planes, or the harboring of hijackers.
Secondly, we all committed ourselves, as have all my predecessors in the Oval Office not to permit the spread of nuclear weapons to a terrorist nation, or to any other nation that does not presently have those weapons or capabilities for explosives.
Third, not to make any sales of materiel or weapons to a nation which is involved in terrorist activities.
And, lastly, not to deal with the PLO until and unless the PLO recognizes Israel's right to exist and recognizes UN Resolution 242 as a basis for Middle East peace.
These are a few of the things to which our nation is committed, and we will continue with these commitments.
 Yes.
I have no quarrel whatsoever with the things that have been done, because I believe it is high time that the civilized countries of the world made it plain that there is no room worldwide for terrorism; there will be no negotiation with terrorists of any kind.
And while I have a last word here, I would like to correct a misstatement of fact by the President.
I have never made the statement that he suggested about nuclear proliferation and nuclear proliferation, or the trying to halt it, would be a major part of a foreign policy of mine.
 Yes.
I think I'm right because I believe that we must have a consistent foreign policy, a strong America, and a strong economy.
And then, as we build up our national security, to restore our margin of safety, we at the same time try to restrain the Soviet build-up, which has been going forward at a rapid pace, and for quite some time.
The SALT II treaty was the result of negotiations that Mr. Carter's team entered into after he had asked the Soviet Union for a discussion of actual reduction of nuclear strategic weapons.
And his emissary, I think, came home in 12 hours having heard a very definite nyet.
But taking that one no from the Soviet Union, we then went back into negotiations on their terms, because Mr. Carter had canceled the B-I bomber, delayed the MX, delayed the Trident submarine, delayed the cruise missile, shut down the Missile Man - the three - the Minuteman missile production line, and whatever other things that might have been done.
The Soviet Union sat at the table knowing that we had gone forward with unilateral concessions without any reciprocation from them whatsoever.
Now, I have not blocked the SALT II treaty, as Mr. Carter and Mr. Mondale suggest I have.
It has been blocked by a Senate in which there is a Democratic majority.
Indeed, the Senate Armed Services Committee voted 10 to 0, with seven abstentions, against the SALT II treaty, and declared that it was not in the national security interests of the United States.
Besides which, it is illegal, because the law of the land, passed by Congress, says that we cannot accept a treaty in which we are not equal.
And we are not equal in this treaty for one reason alone - our B-2 bombers are considered to be strategic weapons; their Backfire bombers are not.
 Yes, I'd be glad to.
Inflation.
unemployment, the cities are all very important issues, but they pale into insignificance in the life and duties of a President when compared with the control of nuclear weapons.
Every President who has served in the Oval Office since Harry Truman has been dedicated to the proposition of controlling nuclear weapons.
To negotiate with the Soviet Union a balanced, controlled, observable, and then reducing levels of atomic weaponry, there is a disturbing pattern in the attitude of Governor Reagan.
He has never supported any of those arms control agreements - the limited test ban, SALT I, nor the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, nor the Vladivostok Treaty negotiated with the Soviet Union by President Ford - and now he wants to throw into the wastebasket a treaty to control nuclear weapons on a balanced and equal basis between ourselves and the Soviet Union, negotiated over a seven-year period, by myself and my two Republican predecessors.
The Senate has not voted yet on the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.
There have been preliminary skirmishing in the committees of the Senate, but the Treaty has never come to the floor of the Senate for either a debate or a vote.
It's understandable that a Senator in the preliminary debates can make an irresponsible statement, or, maybe, an ill-advised statement.
You've got 99 other senators to correct that mistake, if it is a mistake.
But when a man who hopes to be President says, take this treaty, discard it, do not vote, do not debate, do not explore the issues, do not finally capitalize on this long negotiation - that is a very dangerous and disturbing thing.
 Yes.
Governor Reagan is making some very misleading and disturbing statements.
He not only advocates the scrapping of this treaty - and I don't know that these men that he quotes are against the treaty in its final form - but he also advocates the possibility, he said it's been a missing element, of playing a trump card against the Soviet Union of a nuclear arms race, and is insisting upon nuclear superiority by our own nation, as a predication for negotiation in the future with the Soviet Union.
If President Brezhnev said, we will scrap this treaty, negotiated under three American Presidents over a seven-year period of time, we insist upon nuclear superiority as a basis for future negotiations, and we believe that the launching of a nuclear arms race is a good basis for future negotiations, it's obvious that I, as President, and all Americans, would reject such a proposition.
This would mean the resumption of a very dangerous nuclear arms race.
It would be very disturbing to American people.
It would change the basic tone and commitment that our nation has experienced ever since the Second World War, with al Presidents, Democratic and Republican.
And it would also be very disturbing to our allies, all of whom support this nuclear arms treaty.
In addition to that, the adversarial relationship between ourselves and the Soviet Union would undoubtedly deteriorate very rapidly.
This attitude is extremely dangerous and belligerent in its tone, although it's said with a quiet voice.
 I know the President's supposed to be replying to me, but sometimes, I have a hard time in connecting what he's saying, with what I have said or what my positions are.
I sometimes think he's like the witch doctor that gets mad when a good doctor comes along with a cure that'll work.
My point I have made already, Mr. President, with regard to negotiating: it does not call for nuclear superiority on the part of the United States.
It calls for a mutual reduction of these weapons, as I say, that neither of us can represent a threat to the other.
And to suggest that the SALT II treaty that your negotiators negotiated was just a continuation, and based on all of the preceding efforts by two previous Presidents, is just not true.
It was a new negotiation because, as I say, President Ford was within about 10% of having a solution that could be acceptable.
And I think our allies would be very happy to go along with a fair and verifiable SALT agreement.
 I think, to close out this discussion, it would be better to put into perspective what we're talking about.
I had a discussion with my daughter, Amy, the other day, before I came here, to ask her what the most important issue was.
She said she thought nuclear weaponry - and the control of nuclear arms.
This is a formidable force.
Some of these weapons have 10 megatons of explosion.
If you put 50 tons of TNT in each one of railroad cars, you would have a carload of TNT - a trainload of TNT stretching across this nation.
That's one major war explosion in a warhead.
We have thousands, equivalent of megaton, or million tons, of TNT warheads.
The control of these weapons is the single major responsibility of a President, and to cast out this commitment of all Presidents, because of some slight technicalities that can be corrected, is a very dangerous approach.
 I don't think there's any doubt that, in the future, the cost of oil is going to go up.
What I've had as a basic commitment since I've been President is to reduce our dependence on foreign oil.
It can only be done in two ways: one, to conserve energy - to stop the waste of energy - and, secondly, to produce more American energy.
We've been very successful in both cases.
We've now reduced the importing of foreign oil in the last year alone by one-third.
We imported today 2 million barrels of oil less than we did the same date just a year ago.
This commitment has been opening up a very bright vista for our nation in the future, because with the windfall profits tax as a base, we now have an opportunity to use American technology and American ability and American natural resources to expand rapidly the production of synthetic fuels, yes; to expand rapidly the production of solar energy, yes; and also to produce the traditional kinds of American energy.
We will drill more oil and gas wells this year than any year in history.
We'll produce more coal this year than any year in history.
We are exporting more coal this year than any year in history.
And we have an opportunity now with improved transportation systems and improved loading facilities in our ports, to see a very good opportunity on a world international market, to replace OPEC oil with American coal as a basic energy source.
This exciting future will not only give us more energy security, but will also open up vast opportunities for Americans to live a better life and to have millions of new jobs associated with this new and very dynamic industry now in prospect because of the new energy policy that we've put into effect.
 I'm not so sure that it means steadily higher fuel costs, but I do believe that this nation has been portrayed for too long a time to the people as being energy-poor when it is energy-rich.
The coal that the President mentioned - yes, we have it - and yet one-eighth of our total coal resources is not being utilized at all right now.
The mines are closed down; there are 22000 miners out of work.
Most of this is due to regulations which either interfere with the mining of it or prevent the burning of it:.
With our modern technology, yes, we can burn our coal within the limits of the Clean Air Act.
I think, as technology improves, we'll be able to do even better with that.
The other thing is that we have only leased out - begun to explore - 2% of our outer continental shelf for oil, where it is believed, by everyone familiar with that fuel and that source of energy, that there are vast supplies yet to be found.
Our Government has, in the last year or so, taken out of multiple use millions of acres of public lands that once were - well, they were public lands subject to multiple use - exploration for minerals and so forth.
It is believed that probably 70% of the potential oil in the United States is probably hidden in those lands, and no one is allowed to even go and explore to find out if it is there.
This is particularly true of the recent efforts to shut down part of Alaska.
Nuclear power: There were 36 power plants planned in this country.
And let me add the word safety; it must be done with the utmost of safety.
But 32 of those have given up and canceled their plans to build, and again, because Government regulations and permits, and so forth, take - make it take - more than twice as long to build a nuclear plant in the United States as it does to build one in Japan or in Western Europe.
We have the sources here.
We are energy rich, and coal is one of the great potentials we have.
 To repeat myself, we have this year the opportunity, which we'll realize, to produce 800 million tons of coal - an unequaled record in the history of our country.
Governor Reagan says that this is not a good achievement, and he blames restraints on coal production on regulations - regulations that affect the life and the health and safety of miners, and also regulations that protect the purity of our air and the quality our water and our land.
We cannot cast aside these regulations.
We have a chance in the next 15 years, insisting upon the health and safety of workers in the mines, and also preserving the same high air and water pollution standards, to triple the amount of coal we produce.
Governor Reagan's approach to our energy policy, which has already proven its effectiveness, is to repeal, or to change substantially, the windfall profits tax - to return a major portion of $227 billion back to the oil companies; to do away with the Department of Energy; to short-circuit our synthetic fuels program; to put a minimal emphasis on solar power; to emphasize strongly nuclear power plants as a major source of energy in the future.
He wants to put all our eggs in one basket and give that basket to the major oil companies.
 That is a misstatement, of course, of my position.
I just happen to believe that free enterprise can do a better job of producing the things that people need than government can.
The Department of Energy has a multi-billion-dollar budget in excess of $10 billion.
It hasn't produced a quart of oil or a lump of coal, or anything else in the line of energy.
And for Mr. Carter to suggest that I want to do away with the safety laws and with the laws that pertain to clean water and clean air, and so forth.
As Governor of California, I took charge of passing the strictest air pollution laws in the United States - the strictest air quality law that has even been adopted in the United States.
And we created an OSHA - an Occupational Safety and Health Agency - for the protection of employees before the Federal Government had one in place.
And to this day, not one of its decisions or rulings has ever been challenged.
So, I think some of those charges are missing the point.
I am suggesting that there are literally thousands of unnecessary regulations that invade every facet of business, and indeed, very much of our personal lives, that are unnecessary; that Government can do without; that have added $130 billion to the cost of production in this country; and that are contributing their part to inflation.
And I would like to see us a little more free, as we once were.
 Sure.
As a matter of fact,.
the air pollution standard laws that were passed in California were passed over the objections of Governor Reagan, and this is a very well-known fact.
Also, recently, when someone suggested that the Occupational Safety and Health Act should be abolished, Governor Reagan responded, amen.
The offshore drilling rights is a question that Governor Reagan raises often.
As a matter of fact, in the proposal for the Alaska lands legislation, 100% of all the offshore lands would be open for exploration, and 95% of all the Alaska lands, where it is suspected or believed that minerals might exist.
We have, with our five-year plan for the leasing of offshore lands, proposed more land to be drilled than has been opened up for drilling since this program first started in 1954.
So we're not putting restraints on American exploration, we're encouraging it in every way we can.
 Yes.
If it is a well-known fact that I opposed air pollution laws in California, the only thing I can possibly think of is that the President must be suggesting the law that the Federal Government tried to impose on the State of California - not a law, but regulations - that would have made it impossible to drive an automobile within the city limits of any California city, or to have a place to put it if you did drive it against their regulations.
It would have destroyed the economy of California, and, I must say, we had the support of Congress when we pointed out how ridiculous this attempt was by the Environmental Protection Agency.
We still have the strictest air control, or air pollution laws in the country.
As for offshore oiling, only 2% now is so leased and is producing oil.
The rest, as to whether the lands are going to be opened in the next five years or so - we're already five years behind in what we should be doing.
There is more oil now, in the wells that have been drilled, than has been taken out in 121 years that they've been drilled.
 The Social Security system was based on a false premise, with regard to how fast the number of workers would increase and how fast the number of retirees would increase.
It is actuarially out of balance, and this first became evident about 16 years ago, and some of us were voicing warnings then.
Now, it is trillions of dollars out of balance, and the only answer that has come so far is the biggest single tax increase in our nation's history - the payroll tax increase for Social Security - which will only put a band-aid on this and postpone the day of reckoning by a few years at most.
What is needed is a study that I have proposed by a task force of experts to look into this entire problem as to how it can be reformed and made actuarially sound, but with the premise that no one presently dependent on Social Security is going to have the rug pulled out from under them and not get their check.
We cannot frighten, as we have with the threats and the campaign rhetoric that has gone on in this campaign, our senior citizens - leave them thinking that in some way, they're endangered and they would have no place to turn.
They must continue to get those checks, and I believe that the system can be put on a sound actuarial basis.
But it's going to take some study and some work, and not just passing a tax increase to let the load - or the roof - fall in on the next administration.
 As long as there is a Democratic President in the White House, we will have a strong and viable Social Security System, free of the threat of bankruptcy.
Although Governor Reagan has changed his position lately, on four different occasions, he has advocated making Social Security a voluntary system, which would, in effect, very quickly bankrupt it.
I noticed also in The Wall Street Journal early this week, that a preliminary report of his task force advocates making Social Security more sound by reducing the adjustment in Social Security for the retired people to compensate for the impact of inflation.
These kinds of approaches are very dangerous to the security, the well being and the peace of mind of the retired people of this country and those approaching retirement age.
But no matter what it takes in the future to keep Social Security sound, it must be kept that way.
And although there was a serious threat to the Social Security System and its integrity during the 1976 campaign and when I became President, the action of the Democratic Congress working with me has been to put Social Security back on a sound financial basis.
That is the way it will stay.
 Well, that just isn't true.
It has, as I said, delayed the actuarial imbalance falling on us for just a few years with that increase in taxes, and I don't believe we can go on increasing the tax, because the problem for the young people today is that they are paying in far more than they can ever expect to get out.
Now, again this statement that somehow, I wanted to destroy it and I just changed my tune, that I am for voluntary Social Security, which would mean the ruin of it.
Mr. President, the voluntary thing that I suggested many years ago was that with a young man orphaned and raised by an aunt who died, his aunt was ineligible for Social Security insurance because she was not his mother.
And I suggested that if this is an insurance program, certainly the person who is paying in should be able to name his own beneficiary.
That is the closest I have ever come to anything voluntary with Social Security.
I, too, am pledged to a Social Security program that will reassure these senior citizens of ours that they are going to continue to get their money.
There are some changes that I would like to make.
I would like to make a change in the regulation that discriminates against a wife who works and finds that she then is faced with a choice between her father's or her husband's benefits, if he dies first, or what she has paid in; but it does not recognize that she has also been paying in herself, and she is entitled to more than she presently can get.
I'd like to change that.
 These constant suggestions that the basic Social Security System should be changed does call for concern and consternation among the aged of our country.
It is obvious that we should have a commitment to them, that Social Security benefits should not be taxed and that there would be no peremptory change in the standards by which Social Security payments are made to retired people.
We also need to continue to index Social Security payments, so that if inflation rises, the Social Security payments would rise a commensurate degree to let the buying power of a Social Security check continue intact.
In the past, the relationship between Social Security and Medicare has been very important to providing some modicum of aid for senior citizens in the retention of health benefits.
Governor Reagan, as a matter of fact, began his political career campaigning around this nation against Medicare.
Now, we have an opportunity to move toward national health insurance, with an emphasis on the prevention of disease, an emphasis on out-patient care, not in-patient care; an emphasis on hospital cost containment to hold down the cost of hospital care far those who are ill, an emphasis on catastrophic health insurance, so that if a family is threatened with being wiped out economically because of a very high medical bill, then the insurance would help pay for it.
These are the kinds of elements of a national health insurance, important to the American people.
Governor Reagan, again, typically is against such a proposal.
 When I opposed Medicare, there was another piece of legislation meeting the same problem before the Congress.
I happened to favor the other piece of legislation and thought that it would be better for the senior citizens and provide better care than the one that was finally passed.
I was not opposing the principle of providing care for them.
I was opposing one piece of legislation versus another.
There is something else about Social Security.
Of course, it doesn't come out of the payroll tax.
It comes out of a general fund, but something should be done about it.
I think it is disgraceful that the Disability Insurance Fund in Social Security finds checks going every month to tens of thousands of people who are locked up in our institutions for crime or for mental illness, and they are receiving disability checks from Social Security every month while a state institution provides for all of their needs and their care.
 I think this debate on Social Security, Medicare, national health insurance typifies, as vividly any other subject tonight, the basic historical differences between the Democratic Party and Republican Party.
The allusions to basic changes in the minimum wage is another, and the deleterious comments that Governor Reagan has made about unemployment compensation.
These commitments that the Democratic Party has historically made to the working families of this nation have been extremely important to the growth in their stature and in a better quality of life for them.
I noticed recently that Governor Reagan frequently quotes Democratic presidents in his acceptance address.
I have never heard a candidate for President, who is a Republican, quote a Republican president, but when they get in office, they try to govern like Republicans.
So, it is good fo the American people to remember that there is a sharp basic historical difference between Governor Reagan and me on these crucial issues - also, between the two parties that we represent.
 Barbara, reluctant as I am to say anything critical about Governor Reagan, I will try to answer your question.
First of all, there is the historical perspective that I just described.
This is a contest between a Democrat in the mainstream of my party, as exemplified by the actions that I have taken in the Oval Office the last four years, as contrasted with Governor Reagan, who in most cases does typify his party, but in some cases, there is a radical departure by him from the heritage of Eisenhower and others.
The most important crucial difference in this election campaign, in my judgment, is the approach to the control of nuclear weaponry and the inclination to control or not to control the spread of atomic weapons to other nations who don't presently have it, particularly terrorist nations.
The inclination that Governor Reagan has exemplified in many troubled times since he has been running for President - I think since 1968 - to inject American military forces in places like North Korea, to put a blockade around Cuba this year, or in some instances, to project American forces into a fishing dispute against the small nation of Ecuador on the west coast of South America.
This is typical of his long-standing inclination, on the use of American power, not to resolve disputes diplomatically and peacefully, but to show that the exercise of military power is best proven by the actual use of it.
Obviously, no President wants war, and I certainly do not believe that Governor Reagan, if he were President, would want war, but a President in the Oval Office has to make a judgment on almost a daily basis about how to exercise the enormous power of our country for peace, through diplomacy, or in a careless way in a belligerent attitude which has exemplified his attitudes in the past.
 Well, Barbara, I believe that there is a fundamental difference - and I think it has been evident in most of the answers that Mr. Carter has given tonight - that he seeks the solution to anything as another opportunity for a Federal Government program.
I happen to believe that the Federal Government has usurped powers of autonomy and authority that belong back at the state and local level.
It has imposed on the individual freedoms of the people, and there are more of these things that could be solved by the people themselves, if they were given a chance, or by the levels of government that were closer to them.
Now, as to why I should be and he shouldn't be, when he was a candidate in 1976, President Carter invented a thing he called the misery index.
He added the rate of unemployment and the rate of inflation, and it came, at that time, to 12.5% under President Ford.
He said that no man with that size misery index has a right to seek reelection to the Presidency.
Today, by his own decision, the misery index is in excess of 20%, and I think this must suggest something.
But, when I had quoted a Democratic President, as the President says, I was a Democrat.
I said many foolish things back in those days.
But the President that I quoted had made a promise, a Democratic promise, and I quoted him because it was never kept.
And today, you would find that that promise is at the very heart of what Republicanism represents in this country today.
That's why I believe there are going to be millions of Democrats that are going to vote with us this time around, because they too want that promise kept.
It was a promise for less government and less taxes and more freedom for the people.
 I mentioned the radical departure of Governor Reagan from the principles or ideals of historical perspective of his own party.
I don't think that can be better illustrated than in the case of guaranteeing women equal rights under the Constitution of our nation.
For 40 years, the Republican Party platforms called for guaranteeing women equal rights with a constitutional amendment.
Six predecessors of mine who served in the Oval Office called for this guarantee of women's rights.
Governor Reagan and his new Republican Party have departed from this commitment - a very severe blow to the opportunity for women to finally correct discrimination under which they have suffered.
When a man and a women do the same amount of work, a man gets paid $1.00, a women only gets paid 59 cents.
And the equal rights amendment only says that equality of rights shall not be abridged for omen b the Federal Government or by he state governments.
That is all it says a simple guarantee of equality of opportunity which typifies the Democratic arty, and which is a very important commitment of mine, as contrasted with Governor Reagan's radical departure from the long-standing policy of his own party.
 Yes.
Mr. President, once again, I happen to be against the amendment, because I think the amendment will take this problem out of the hands of elected legislators and put it in the hands f unelected judges.
I am for equal rights, and while you have been in office for four ears and not one single state - and most f them have a majority of Democratic legislators - has added to the ratification r voted to ratify the equal rights amendment.
While I was Governor, more than eight years ago, I found 14 separate instances where women were discriminated against in the body of California law, and I had passed and signed into law 14 statutes that eliminated those discriminations, including the economic ones that you have just mentioned - equal pay and so forth.
I believe that if in all these years that we have spent trying to get the amendment, that we had spent as much time correcting these laws, as we did in California - and we were the first to do it.
If I were President, I would also now take a look at the hundreds of Federal regulations which discriminate against women and which go right on while everyone is looking for an amendment.
I would have someone ride herd on those regulations, and we would start eliminating those discriminations in the Federal Government against women.
 Howard, I'm a Southerner, and I share the basic beliefs of my region that an excessive government intrusion into the private affairs of American citizens and also into the private affairs of the free enterprise system.
One of the commitments that I made was to deregulate the major industries of this country.
We've been remarkably successful, with the help of a Democratic Congress.
We have deregulated the air industry, the rail industry, the trucking industry, financial institutions.
We're now working on the communications industry.
In addition to that, I believe that this element of discrimination is something that the South has seen so vividly as a blight on our region of the country which has now been corrected - not only racial discrimination but discrimination against people that have to work for a living - because we have been trying to pick ourselves up by our bootstraps, since the long depression years, and lead a full and useful life in the affairs of this country.
We have made remarkable success.
It is part of my consciousness and of my commitment to continue this progress.
So, my heritage as a Southerner, my experience in the Oval Office, convinces me that what I have just described is a proper course for the future.
 Well, my last word is again to say this: We were talking about this very simple amendment and women's rights.
And I make it plain again: I am for women's rights.
But I would like to call the attention of the people to the fact that that so-called simple amendment would be used by mischievous men to destroy discriminations that properly belong, by law, to women respecting the physical differences between the two sexes, labor laws that protect them against things that would be physically harmful to them.
Those would all, could all be challenged by men.
And the same would be true with regard to combat service in the military and so forth.
I thought that was the subject we were supposed to be on.
But, if we're talking about how much we think about the working people and so forth, I'm the only fellow who ever ran for this job who was six times President of his own union and still has a lifetime membership in that union.
 First of all, I'd like to thank the League of Women Voters for making this debate possible.
I think it's been a very constructive debate and I hope it's helped to acquaint the American people with the sharp differences between myself and Governor Reagan.
Also, I want to thank the people of Cleveland and Ohio for being such hospitable hosts during these last few hours in my life.
I've been President now for almost four years.
I've had to make thousands of decisions, and each one of those decisions has been a learning process.
I've seen the strength of my nation, and I've seen the crises it approached in a tentative way.
And I've had to deal with those crises as best I could.
As I've studied the record between myself and Governor Reagan, I've been impressed with the stark differences that exist between us.
I think the result of this debate indicates that that fact is true.
I consider myself in the mainstream of my party.
I consider myself in the mainstream even of the bipartisan list of Presidents who served before me.
The United States must be a nation strong; the United States must be a nation secure.
We must have a society that's just and fair.
And we must extend the benefits of our own commitment to peace, to create a peaceful world.
I believe that since I've been in office, there have been six or eight areas of combat evolved in other parts of the world.
In each case, I alone have had to determine the interests of my country and the degree of involvement of my country.
I've done that with moderation, with care, with thoughtfulness; sometimes consulting experts.
But, I've learned in this last three and a half years that when an issue is extremely difficult, when the call is very close, the chances are the experts will be divided almost 50-50.
And the final judgment about the future of the nation - war, peace, involvement, reticence, thoughtfulness, care, consideration, concern - has to be made by the man in the Oval Office.
It's a lonely job, but with the involvement of the American people in the process, with an open Government, the job is a very gratifying one.
The American people now are facing, next Tuesday, a lonely decision.
Those listening to my voice will have to make a judgment about the future of this country.
And I think they ought to remember that one vote can make a lot of difference.
If one vote per precinct had changed in 1960, John Kennedy would never have been President of this nation.
And if a few more people had gone to the polls and voted in 1968, Hubert Humphrey would have been President; Richard Nixon would not.
There is a partnership involved in our nation.
To stay strong, to stay at peace, to raise high the banner of human rights, to set an example for the rest of the world, to let our deep beliefs and commitments be felt by others in other nations, is my plan for the future.
I ask the American people to join me in this partnership.
 Yes, I would like to add my words of thanks, too, to the ladies of the League of Women Voters for making these debates possible.
I'm sorry that we couldn't persuade the bringing in of the third candidate, so that he could have been seen also in these debates.
But still, it's good that at least once, all three of us were heard by the people of this country.
Next Tuesday is Election Day.
Next Tuesday all of you will go to the polls, will stand there in the polling place and make a decision.
I think when you make that decision, it might be well if you would ask yourself, are you better off than you were four years ago?
Is it easier for you to go and buy things in the stores than it was four years ago?
Is there more or less unemployment in the country than there was four years ago?
Is America as respected throughout the world as it was?
Do you feel that our security is as safe, that we're as strong as we were four years ago?
And if you answer all of those questions yes, why then, I think your choice is very obvious as to whom you will vote for.
If you don't agree, if you don't think that this course that we've been on for the last four years is what you would like to see us follow for the next four, then I could suggest another choice that you have.
This country doesn't have to be in the shape that it is in.
We do not have to go on sharing in scarcity with the country getting worse off, with unemployment growing.
We talk about the unemployment lines.
If all of the unemployed today were in a single line allowing two feet for each of them, that line would reach from New York City to Los Angeles, California.
All of this can be cured and all of it can be solved.
I have not had the experience the President has had in holding that office, but I think in being Governor of California, the most populous state in the Union - if it were a nation, it would be the seventh-ranking economic power in the world - I, too, had some lonely moments and decisions to make.
I know that the economic program that I have proposed for this nation in the next few years can resolve many of the problems that trouble us today.
I know because we did it there.
We cut the cost - the increased cost of government - in half over the eight years.
We returned $5.7 billion in tax rebates, credits and cuts to our people.
We, as I have said earlier, fell below the national average in inflation when we did that.
And I know that we did give back authority and autonomy to the people.
I would like to have a crusade today, and I would like to lead that crusade with your help.
And it would be one to take Government off the backs of the great people of this country, and turn you loose again to do those things that I know you can do so well, because you did them and made this country great.
Thank you.
 One of the key tests of leadership is whether one sees clearly the nature of the problems confronted by our nation.
And perhaps the dominant domestic issue of our times is what do we do about these enormous deficits.
 Absolutely, and I proposed over a hundred billion dollars in cuts in Federal spending over 4 years, but I am not going to cut it out of Social Security and Medicare and student assistance and things -- [applause] -- that people need.
These people depend upon all of us for the little security that they have, and I'm not going to do it that way.
 Yes.
I don't believe that Mr. Mondale has a plan for balancing the budget; he has a plan for raising taxes.
And, as a matter of fact, the biggest single tax increase in our nation's history took place 1977.
And for the 5 years previous to our taking office, taxes doubled in the United States, and the budgets increased $318 billion.
So, there is no ratio between taxing and balancing a budget.
Whether you borrow the money or whether you simply tax it away from the people, you're taking the same amount of money out of the private sector, unless and until you bring down government's share of what it is taking.
 Well, that's exactly the commitment that was made to the American people in 1980: He would never reduce benefits.
And of course, what happened right after the election is they proposed to cut Social Security benefits by 25 percent -- reducing the adjustment for inflation, cutting out minimum benefits for the poorest on Social Security, removing educational benefits for dependents whose widows were trying -- with widows trying to get them through college.
Everybody remembers that; people know what happened.
 Well, first of all, I think the first answer this evening suggests exactly what I'm saying.
There is no question that we face this massive deficit, and almost everybody agrees unless we get it down, the chances for long-term, healthy growth are nil.
And it's also unfair to dump these tremendous bills on our children.
 Well, I think we're getting better all the time.
And I think tonight, as we contrast for the first time our differing approach to government, to values, to the leadership in this country, I think as this debate goes forward, the American people will have for the first time a chance to weigh the two of us against each other.
And I think, as a part of that process, what I am trying to say will come across, and that is that we must lead, we must command, we must direct, and a President must see it like it is.
He must stand for the values of decency that the American people stand for, and he must use the power of the White House to try to control these nuclear weapons and lead this world toward a safer world.
 Well, whether he does or not, let me suggest my own idea about the leadership factor, since you've asked it.
And, incidentally, I might say that with regard to the 25-percent cut in Social Security -- before I get to the answer to your question -- the only 25-percent cut that I know of was accompanying that huge 1977 tax increase, was a cut of 25 percent in the benefits for every American who was born after 1916.
 Our policy was not to cut subsidies.
We have believed in partnership, and that was an example of a partnership between, not only local government and the Federal Government but also between the private sector that built that particular structure.
And this is what we've been trying to do, is involve the Federal Government in such partnerships.
 Well, I guess I'm reminded a little bit of what Will Rogers once said about Hoover.
He said, "It's not what he doesn't know that bothers me; it's what he knows for sure that just ain't so.''
[Laughter] The fact of it is: The President's budget sought to cut Social Security by 25 percent.
It's not an opinion; it's a fact.
And when the President was asked the other day, "What do you want to cut in the budget?
'', he said, "Cut those things I asked for but didn't get.''
That's Social Security and Medicare.
 Well, let me just respond with regard to Social Security.
When we took office, we discovered that the program that the Carter-Mondale administration had said would solve the fiscal problems of Social Security for the next 50 years wouldn't solve them for 5.
Social Security was due to go bankrupt before 1983.
 Well, I was raised to have a faith and a belief and have been a member of a church since I was a small boy.
In our particular church, we did not use that term, "born again,'' so I don't know whether I would fit that -- that particular term.
But I have -- thanks to my mother, God rest her soul -- the firmest possible belief and faith in God.
And I don't believe -- I believe, I should say, as Lincoln once said, that I could not -- I would be the most stupid man in the world if I thought I could confront the duties of the office I hold if I could not turn to someone who was stronger and greater than all others.
And I do resort to prayer.
 The answer to your question is very simple about why I don't go to church.
I have gone to church regularly all my life, and I started to here in Washington.
And now, in the position I hold and in the world in which we live, where Embassies do get blown up in Beirut -- we're supposed to talk about that on the debate the 21st, I understand -- but I pose a threat to several hundred people if I go to church.
 First of all, I accept President Reagan's affirmation of faith.
I'm sure that we all accept and admire his commitment to his faith, and we are strengthened, all of us, by that fact.
 No.
What I object to -- [applause] -- what I object to -- what I object to is someone seeking to use his faith to question the faith of another or to use that faith and seek to use the power of government to impose it on others.
 Yes, it's very difficult to rebut, because I find myself in so much agreement with Mr. Mondale.
I, too, want that wall that is in the Constitution of separation of church and state to remain there.
The only attacks I have made are on people who apparently would break away at that wall from the government side, using the government, using the power of the courts and so forth to hinder that part of the Constitution that says the government shall not only not establish a religion, it shall not inhibit the practice of religion.
And they have been using these things to have government, through court orders, inhibit the practice of religion.
A child wants to say grace in a school cafeteria and a court rules that they can't do it because it's school property.
These are they types of things that I think have been happening in a kind of a secular way that have been eroding that separation, and I am opposed to that.
 The platform to which the President refers, in fact, calls for a religious test in the selection of judges.
And Jerry Falwell says that means we get two or three judges.
And it would involve a religious test for the first time in American life.
 My answer is that this campaign isn't over yet.
And when people vote, I think you're going to see a very strong verdict by the American people that they favor the approach that I'm talking about.
 Well, tonight we had the first debate over the deficit.
The President says it'll disappear automatically.
I've said it's going to take some work.
I think the American people will draw their own conclusions.
 Well, again, I'm running on the record.
I think sometimes Mr. Mondale's running away from his.
But I'm running on the record of what we have asked for.
We'll continue to try to get things that we didn't get in a program that has already brought the rate of spending of government down from 17 percent to 6.1 percent, a program of returning authority and autonomy to the local and State governments that has been unjustly seized by the Federal Government.
And you might find those words in a Democratic platform of some years ago -- I know, because I was a Democrat at that time.
And I left the party eventually, because I could no longer follow the turn in the Democratic leadership that took us down an entirely different path, a path of centralizing authority in the Federal Government, lacking trust in the American people.
 There are tasks that government legitimately should enforce and tasks that government performs well, and you've named some of them.
Crime has come down the last 2 years, for the first time in many, many decades that it has come down -- or since we've kept records -- 2 consecutive years, and last year it came down the biggest drop in crime that we've had.
I think that we've had something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide.
 The President says that when the Democratic Party made its turn, he left it.
The year that he decided we had lost our way was the year that John F. Kennedy was running against Richard Nixon.
I was chairman of "Minnesotans for Kennedy;'' President Reagan was chairman of a thing called "Democrats for Nixon.''
Now, maybe we made a wrong turn with Kennedy, but I'll be proud of supporting him all of my life.
And I'm very happy that John Kennedy was elected, because John Kennedy looked at the future with courage, saw what needed to be done, and understood his own government.
 Before I campaigned as a Democrat for a Republican candidate for President, I had already voted for Dwight Eisenhower to be President of the United States.
And so, my change had come earlier than that.
I hadn't gotten around to reregistering as yet.
I found that was rather difficult to do.
But I finally did it.
 I have believed that in the appointment of judges that all that was specified in the party platform was that they respect the sanctity of human life.
Now, that I would want to see in any judge and with regard to any issue having to do with human life.
But with regard to abortion, and I have a feeling that this is -- there's been some reference without naming it here in the remarks of Mr. Mondale tied to injecting religion into government.
With me, abortion is not a problem of religion, it's a problem of the Constitution.
 The laws regarding that always were State laws.
It was only when the Supreme Court handed down a decision that the Federal Government intervened in what had always been a State policy.
Our laws against murder are State laws.
So, I would think that this would be the point of enforcement on this.
 This is one of the most emotional and difficult issues that could possibly be debated.
I think your questions, however, underscore the fact there is probably no way that government should or could answer this question in every individual case and in the private lives of the American people.
 The basic decision of the Supreme Court is that each person has to make this judgment in her own life, and that's the way it's been done.
And it's a personal and private, moral judgment.
I don't know the answer to when life begins.
And it's not that simple, either.
You've got another life involved.
And if it's rape, how do you draw moral judgments on that?
If it's incest, how do you draw moral judgments on that?
Does every woman in America have to present herself before some judge picked by Jerry Falwell to clear her personal judgment?
It won't work.
[Applause]
 Yes.
Well, with regard to this being a personal choice, isn't that what a murderer is insisting on, his or her right to kill someone because of whatever fault they think justifies that?
 I agree with that, and that's why I was a principal sponsor of a liberal adoption law, so that more of these children could come to term, so that the young mothers were educated, so we found an option, an alternative.
I'm all for that.
But the question is whether this other option proposed by the President should be pursued.
And I don't agree with it.
 In my opinion, as we deal with this deficit, people from about $70,000 a year on down have to be dealt with very, very carefully, because they are the ones who didn't get any relief the first time around.
 The first thing is, everybody 25,000 and under would have no tax increase.
 You know, I wasn't going to say this at all, but I can't help it.
There you go again.
[Laughter] I don't have a plan to tax -- or increase taxes.
I'm not going to increase taxes.
I can understand why you are, Mr. Mondale, because as a Senator you voted 16 times to increase taxes.
 Yes, I had used -- "last resort'' would always be with me.
If you got the Government down to the lowest level, that you yourself could say it could not go any lower and still perform the services for the people, and if the recovery was so complete that you knew you were getting the ultimate amount of revenues that you could get through that growth, and there was still some slight difference there between those two lines, then I had said once that, yes, you would have to then look to see if taxes should not be adjusted.
 Well, first of all, I gave him the benefit of the doubt on the house deal.
I'm just talking about the 12.8 percent that he paid, and that's what's happening all over this country with wealthy Americans.
They've got so many loopholes they don't have to pay much in taxes.
 Yes.
 You remember the last time you said that?
 Mm-hmm.
 You said it when President Carter said that you were going to cut Medicare, and you said, "Oh, no, there you go again, Mr.
President.''
And what did you do right after the election?
You went out and tried to cut $20 billion out of Medicare.
And so, when you say, "There you go again'' -- people remember this, you know.
[Laughter] And people will remember that you signed the biggest tax increase in the history of California and the biggest tax increase in the history of the United States, and what are you going to do?
You've got a $260 billion deficit.
You can't wish it away.
You won't slow defense spending; you refuse to do that -- --
 Sorry.
 Yes.
With regard to Medicare, no, but it's time for us to say that Medicare is in pretty much the same condition that Social Security was, and something is going to have to be done in the next several years to make it fiscally sound.
And, no, I never proposed any $20 billion should come out of Medicare; I have proposed that the program we must treat with that particular problem.
And maybe part of that problem is because during the 4 years of the Carter-Mondale administration medical costs in this country went up 87 percent.
 I gave you back some of that time.
[Laughter]
 Well, some of those facts and figures just don't stand up.
Yes, there has been an increase in poverty, but it is a lower rate of increase than it was in the preceding years before we got here.
It has begun to decline, but it is still going up.
 Yes.
 That had nothing to do with the other thing of talking about their needs or anything.
I remember distinctly, I was segueing into another subject.
I was talking about the things that have been accomplished, and that was referring to the revival of patriotism and optimism, the new spirit that we're finding all over America.
And it is a wonderful thing to see when you get out there among the people.
So, that was the only place that that was used.
 Number one, we've got to get the debt down to get the interest rates down so the economy will grow and people will be employed.
 I think the American people want to make certain that that dollar is wisely spent.
I think they stand for civil rights.
I know they're all for education in science and training, which I strongly support.
They want these young people to have a chance to get jobs and the rest.
I think the business community wants to get involved.
I think they're asking for new and creative ways to try to reach it with everyone involved.
I think that's part of it.
I think also that the American people want a balanced program that gives us long-term growth so that they're not having to take money that's desperate to themselves and their families and give it to someone else.
I'm opposed to that, too.
 Yes.
The connection that's been made again between the deficit and the interest rates -- there is no connection between them.
There is a connection between interest rates and inflation, but I would call to your attention that in 1981 while we were operating still on the Carter-Mondale budget that we inherited -- that the interest rates came down from 21\1/2\, down toward the 12 or 13 figure.
And while they were coming down, the deficits had started their great increase.
They were going up.
Now, if there was a connection I think that there would be a different parallel between deficits getting larger and interest rates going down.
 Mr. President, if I heard you correctly, you said that these deficits don't have anything to do with interest rates.
I will grant you that interest rates were too high in 1980, and we can have another debate as to why -- energy prices and so on.
There's no way of glossing around that.
But when these huge deficits went in place in 1981, what's called the real interest rates -- the spread between inflation and what a loan costs you doubled -- and that's still the case today.
And the result is interest costs that have never been seen before in terms of real charges, and it's attributable to the deficit.
 Do you want to give me some suggestions?
[Laughter] I'm going to use my time a little differently.
I'm going to give the President some credit.
I think the President has done some things to raise the sense of spirit, morale, good feeling in this country, and he's entitled to credit for that.
What I think we need, however, is not just that but to move forward, not just congratulating ourselves but challenging ourselves to get on with the business of dealing with America's problems.
 Without any doubt, I have stood up and told the American people that that $263 billion deficit must come down.
And I've done what no candidate for President has ever done, I told you before the election what I'd do.
 Well, now, I have to start with a smile, since his kind words to me.
 Oh, I -- --
 Okay.
All right.
 Why the deficits are so much of a problem for him now, but that in 1976, when the deficit was $52 billion and everyone was panicking about that, he said, no, that he thought it ought to be bigger, because a bigger deficit would stimulate the economy and would help do away with unemployment.
In 1979 he made similar statements, the same effect, that the deficits -- there was nothing wrong with having deficits.
 Well, we've just finished almost the whole debate.
And the American people don't have the slightest clue about what President Reagan will do about these deficits.
[Laughter] And yet, that's the most important single issue of our time.
 No, I might as well just go with -- --
 I don't think so.
I'm all confused now.
 All right.
 Well, we'll include it in that.
 Four years ago, in similar circumstances to this, I asked you, the American people, a question.
I asked: "Are you better off than you were 4 years before?''
The answer to that obviously was no, and as the result, I was elected to this office and promised a new beginning.
 I want to thank the League of Women Voters and the city of Louisville for hosting this evening's debate.
I want to thank President Reagan for agreeing to debate.
He didn't have to, and he did, and we all appreciate it.
 No, I don't, Bernard.
And I think you know that I've opposed the death penalty during all of my life.
I don't see any evidence that it's a deterrent, and I think there are better and more effective ways to deal with violent crime.
We've done so in my own state.
And it's one of the reasons why we have had the biggest drop in crime of any industrial state in America; why we have the lowest murder rate of any industrial state in America.
But we have work to do in this nation.
We have work to do to fight a real war, not a phony war, against drugs.
And that's something I want to lead, something we haven't had over the course of the past many years, even though the Vice President has been at least allegedly in charge of that war.
We have much to do to step up that war, to double the number of drug enforcement agents, to fight both here and abroad, to work with our neighbors in this hemisphere.
And I want to call a hemispheric summit just as soon after the 20th of January as possible to fight that war.
But we also have to deal with drug education prevention here at home.
And that's one of the things that I hope I can lead personally as the President of the United States.
We've had great success in my own state.
And we've reached out to young people and their families and been able to help them by beginning drug education and prevention in the early elementary grades.
So we can fight this war, and we can win this war.
And we can do so in a way that marshals our forces, that provides real support for state and local law enforcement officers who have not been getting that support, and do it in a way which will bring down violence in this nation, will help our youngsters to stay away from drugs, will stop this avalanche of drugs that's pouring into the country, and will make it possible for our kids and our families to grow up in safe and secure and decent neighborhoods.
 Well, a lot of what this campaign is about, it seems to me Bernie, goes to the question of values.
And here I do have, on this particular question, a big difference with my opponent.
You see, I do believe that some crimes are so heinous, so brutal, so outrageous, and I'd say particularly those that result in the death of a police officer, for those real brutal crimes, I do believe in the death penalty, and I think it is a deterrent, and I believe we need it.
And I'm glad that the Congress moved on this drug bill and have finally called for that related to these narcotics drug kingpins.
And so we just have an honest difference of opinion: I support it and he doesn't.
 Bernie.
 I'd have confidence in him.
And I made a good selection.
And I've never seen such a pounding, an unfair pounding, on a young Senator in my entire life.
And I've never seen a presidential campaign where the presidential nominee runs against my vice presidential nominee; never seen one before.
(Applause)
 But you know, Lloyd Bentsen jumped on Dan Quayle, when Dan Quayle said, he's had roughly the same amount of experience.
He had two terms in the Congress.
He had two terms in the Senate, serving his second term.
He founded authored, the job training partnership act.
It says to American working men and women that are thrown out of work for no fault of their own that they're going to have jobs.
We're moving into a new competitive age, and we need that kind of thing.
He, unlike my opponent, is an expert in national defense; helped amend the INF treaty so we got a good, sound treaty, when these people over here were talking about a freeze.
If we'd listened to them, we would never have had a treaty.
And so I have great confidence in him.
And it's turning around.
You know, the American people are fair.
They don't like it when there's an unfair pounding and kind of hooting about people.
They want to judge it on the record itself.
And so I'm proud of my choice.
And you know, I don't think age is the only criterion.
But I'll tell you something, I'm proud that people who are 30 years old and 40 years old now have someone in their generation that is going to be vice president of the United States of America.
I made a good selection.
The American people are seeing it, and I'm proud of it; that's what I'd say.
And he could do the job.
 Bernard, this was the first presidential decision that we as nominees were called upon to make.
And that's why people are so concerned.
Because it was an opportunity for us to demonstrate what we were looking for in a running mate.
More than that, it was the first national security decision that we had to make.
The Vice President talks about national security.
Three times since World War II, the Vice President has had to suddenly become the President and commander in chief.
I picked Lloyd Bentsen, because I thought he was the best qualified person for the job.
(Applause) GOY.
 Mr. Bush picked Dan Quayle, and before he did it, he said, watch my choice for vice president, it will tell all And it sure did.
It sure did.
(Applause)
 No, because I'm pledged to that, and yes, some taxes have gone up.
And the main point is, taxes have been cut, and yet income is up to the Federal Government by 25 percent in the last three years.
And so what I want to do is keep this expansion going.
I don't want to kill it off by a tax increase.
More Americans at work today than at any time in the history of the country, and a greater percentage of the work force.
And the way you kill expansions is to raise taxes.
And I don't want to do that, and I won't do that.
And what I have proposed is something much better.
And it's going to take discipline of the executive branch; it's going to take discipline of the congressional branch.
And that is what I call a flexible freeze that allows growth about 4 percent or the rate of inflation but does not permit the Congress just to add on spending.
I hear this talk about a blank check.
The American people are pretty smart: they know who writes out the checks.
And they know who appropriates the money.
It is the United States Congress.
And by two to one, Congress is blamed for these deficits.
And the answer is to discipline both the executive branch and the congressional branch by holding the line on taxes.
So I'm pledged to do that.
And those pessimists who say it can't be done, I'm sorry, I just have a fundamental disagreement with them
 Ann, the Vice President made that pledge.
He's broken it three times in the past year already.
So it isn't worth the paper it's printed on.
And what I'm concerned about is that if we continue with the policies that Mr. Bush is talking about here this evening, the flexible freeze somebody described it the other day as a kind of economic slurpee he wants to spend billions on virtually every weapons system around.
He says he's not going to raise taxes, though he has broken that pledge repeatedly.
He says he wants to give the wealthiest one percent of the people in this country a five-year $40 billion tax break, and we're going to pay for it.
And he's been proposing all kinds of programs for new spending costing billions.
Now if we continue with these policies, this trillion and a half dollars worth of new debt that's already been added on the backs of the American taxpayer is going to increase even more, and if we continue with this for another four years, then I'm worried about the next generation, whether we can ever turn this situation around.
No, we need a chief executive who is prepared to lead; who won't blame the Congress; who will lead to bring down that deficit, who will make tough choices on spending
 will go out and do the job that we expect of him and do it with the Congress of the United States.
(Applause)
 No, I'm not sure I can promise that; I don't think either one of us can really.
There is no way of anticipating what may happen.
I will say this: that we will set as our goal a steady, gradual reduction of the deficit, which will require tough choices on spending; it will require a good strong rate of economic growth; it will require a plan that the president works out with the Congress doesn't blame them, works it out with them, which brings that deficit down; it will require us to go out and collect billions and billions of dollars in taxes owed that aren't being paid in this country.
And that's grossly unfair to the average American who is paying his taxes and paying them on time and doesn't have any alternative: it's taken out of his paycheck.
Mr. Bush says we are going to put the IRS on every taxpayer.
That's not what we are going to do.
I'm for the taxpayer bill of rights.
But I think it's unconscionable, Ann, that we should be talking or thinking about imposing new taxes on average Americans when there are billions out there, over $100 billion, in taxes owed that aren't being paid.
Now, I think if we work together on it, and if you have a president that will work with the Congress and the American people, we can bring that deficit down steadily, $20, $25, $30 billion a year, build economic growth, build a good strong future for America, invest in those things which we must invest in economic development, good jobs, good schools for our kids, college opportunity for young people, decent health care and affordable housing, and a clean and safe environment.
We can do all of those things, and at the same time build a future in which we are standing on a good strong fiscal foundation.
Senator Bentsen said, as you recall at the debate with Senator Quayle, that if you give any of us $200 billion worth of hot checks a year, we can create an illusion of prosperity.
But sooner or later that credit card mentality isn't going to work.
And I want to bring to the White House a sense of strength and fiscal responsibility which will build a good strong foundation under which this country, or above which country can move, grow, invest, and build the best America for its people and for our kids and our grandkids.
 The Governor has to balance the budget in his state he is required to by law.
He has raised taxes several times.
I wish he would join me, as a matter of fact, in appealing to the American people for the balanced budget amendment for the federal government and for the line-item veto.
(Applause) I'd like to have that line-item veto for the president, because I think that would be extraordinarily helpful.
And I won't do one other thing that he's had to do: took $29 million out of his state pension fund that's equivalent at the federal level of taking out of the Social Security trust fund.
I'm not going to do that; I won't do that.
(Applause) And so I'm still a little unclear as to whether he's for or against the tax increase.
I have been for the taxpayer bill of rights all along.
And this idea of unleashing a whole bunch-an army, a conventional force army, of IRS agents into everybody's kitchen I mean, he's against most defense matters, and now he wants to get an army of JRS auditors going out there.
(Laughter) I'm against that; I oppose that.
(Boos and applause)
 Just a minute.
 I don't know if the vice president agrees with that.
 Margaret, may I go back and just say to the vice president that I didn't raid the pension fund of Massachusetts you are dead wrong, George, we didn't do that.
As a matter of fact, I'm the first governor in the history of my state to fund that pension system, and I'm very proud of that.
(Applause) I have been in politics for twenty-five years, Margaret; I've won a lot of elections, I've lost a few, as you know, and learned from those losses.
I won the Democratic nomination in fifty-one separate contests.
I think I'm a reasonably likable guy.
(Laughter, scattered applause) I'm serious though I think I'm a little more lovable these days than I used to be back in my youth when I began in my state legislature.
But I'm also a serious guy.
I think the presidency of the United States is a very serious office, and I think we have to address these issues in a very serious way.
So I hope and expect that I will be liked by the people of this country as president of the United States; I certainly hope I will be liked by them on the 8th of November.
(Laughter) But I also think it's important to be somebody who is willing to make those tough choices.
Now, we have just heard two or three times from the vice president: he's not going to raise taxes.
I repeat, within days after you made that pledge, you broke it; you said, well, maybe as a last resort we'll do it.
And you supported legislation this year that's involved tax increases not once, but twice.
So that pledge isn't realistic, and I think the vice president knows it; I think the people of this country know it.
The fact of the matter is that the next president of the United States is going to have to go to the White House seriously, he is going to have to work with the Congress seriously he can't turn to the Congress and blame them for the fact that we don't have a balanced budget and that we have billions and billions of dollars in red ink.
And I am going to be a president who is serious, I hope and expect will be liked by the American people.
But more than that, to do the kind of job that I'm elected to do, will do it with as much good humor as I can, but at the same time will do it in a way which will achieve the goals we want for ourselves and our people.
And I think we know what they are: a good strong future, a future in which there is opportunity for all of our citizens.
 I don't think it's a question of whether people like you or not to make you an effective leader.
I think it's whether you share the broad dreams of the American people, whether you have confidence in the people's ability to get things done or whether you think it all should be turned over, as many of the liberals do, to Washington, D.C. You see, I think it's a question of values, not likability or loveability, it's a question in foreign affairs in experience, knowing world leaders, knowing how to build on a superb record of this administration in arms control, because you'd know exactly how to begin.
You have to learn from experience that making unilateral cuts in defense system is not the way that you enhance peace.
You've got to understand that it is only the United States that can stand for freedom and democracy around the world and we can't turn it over to the United Nations or other multilateral organizations.
It is, though, trying to understand the heartbeat of the country.
And I know these campaigns get knocked a lot, but I think I'd be a better President now for having had to travel to these communities and understand the family values and the importance of neighborhood.
(Applause)
 Please.
 What was he referring to?
 I think my dad would be pretty proud of me, because I think we've come a long long way and I think, you know three months ago, I remember some of the great publications in this country had written me off.
And what I've had to do is define, not just my position, but to define his and I hope I've done it fairly.
And the reason I've had to do that is that he ran on the left in the Democratic primary, ran firmly and ran with conviction and ran on his record.
And then at that Democratic convention, they made a determination and they said there, ideology doesn't matter, just competence.
And in the process the negatives began.
It wasn't me that was there at that convention.
Thank God I was up in the with Jimmy Baker camping out and I didn't have to hear all the personal attacks on me out of that Democratic convention.
And I'm not the one that compared the President of the United States rotting from like a dead fish from the head down.
I didn't do that.
But I have defined the issues and I am not going to let Governor Dukakis go through this election without explaining some of these very liberal position he's the one a liberal, traditional liberal a progressive liberal Democrat.
He's the one that brought up, to garner primary votes, the whole question of the ACLU.
And I have enormous difference with the ACLU on their politic agenda.
Not on their defending some minority opinion on the right or the left.
I support that.
But what I don't like is this left wing political agenda and therefore I have to help define that and if he's unwilling to do it, if he says ideology doesn't matter, I don't agree with him.
(Applause)
 Well, Margaret, we've heard it again tonight and I'm not surprised, the labels.
I guess the Vice President two or three times, said I was coming from the left.
In 1980, President Reagan called you a liberal for voting for Federal gun control.
And this is something Republicans have used for a long time.
They tried it with Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman and John Kennedy.
It's not labels.
It's our vision of America.
And we have two fundamentally different visions of America.
The Vice President is complacent, thinks we ought to stick with the status quo, doesn't think we ought to move ahead, thinking things are okay as they are.
I don't.
I think this is a great country, because we've always wanted to do better, to make our country better, to make our lives better.
We've always been a nation which was ambitious for America and we move forward.
And that's the kind of America I want.
That's the kind of leadership I want to provide.
But I don't think these labels mean a thing and I would hope that tonight in the course of the rest of this campaign, we can have good solid disagreements on issues.
There's nothing the matter with that.
But let's stop labeling each other and lets' get to the heart of the matter which is the future of this country.
(Applause)
 If I knew of three new weapons systems that I thought were purely waste and weren't protected by the Congress, they wouldn't be in the budget.
They would not be in the budget, but you want one now?
I'll give you one, that HMET, that heavy truck, that's cost what is it $850 million and the Pentagon didn't request it and, yet, a member of Congress, a very powerful one, put it in the budget.
I think we can save money through this whole very sophisticated concept, Andrea, that I know you do understand of competitive strategies.
It is new and it is very very different than what's happened, but it's not quite ready to be totally implemented.
But it's very important.
I think we can say, through the Packard Commission Report and I'm very proud that David Packard, the originator of that report, is strongly supporting me.
So, it's not a question of saying our budget is full of a lot of waste.
I don't believe that.
I do think this.
We're in the serious stages of negotiation with the Soviet Union on the strategic arms control talks.
And we're protecting a couple of options in terms of modernizing our strategic forces.
My Secretary of Defense is going to have to make a very difficult decision in which system to go forward with.
But we are protecting both of them.
We are moving forward with negotiations and, you see, I just think it would be dumb negotiating policy with the Soviets to cut out one or the other of the two options right now.
The Soviets are modernizing.
They continue to modernize and we can't simply we've got enough nuclear weapons, let's freeze.
We can't do that.
We have to have modernization, especially if we achieve the 50 percent reduction in strategic weapons that our President is taking the leadership to attain.
And, so, that's the way I'd reply to it and I believe we can have the strongest and best defense possible if we modernize, if we go forward with competitive strategies and if we do follow through on the Packard Commission report.
 Well, Andrea, we've just had another example of why the Vice President's mathematics just don't add up.
I think you know because you've covered these issues, that there's no way that we can build all of the weapons the Vice President says he wants to build within the defense budget.
Everybody knows that including the people at the Pentagon.
Now, my defense secretary is going to have a lot to do with those decisions, but it's going to be the President who's going to have to ultimately decide before that budget goes to the Congress what weapons systems are going to go and what are going to stay.
We are not going to spend the billions and trillions that Mr. Bush wants to spend on Star Wars.
We're not going to spend billions on MX's on railroad cars, which is a weapons system we don't need, can't afford and won't help our defense posture at all.
We're not going to spend hundreds of millions on a space plane from Washington to Tokyo.
Those are decisions that the chief executive has to make.
Yes, we're going to have a strong and credible and effective nuclear deterrent.
We're going to go forward with the Stealth and the D-5 and the advance cruise missile and good conventional forces.
But the next President of the United States will have to make some tough and difficult decisions.
I'm prepared to make them, the Vice President is not.
 Well, Andrea, today we have 13,000 strategic nuclear warheads, on land, on air and in the sea.
That's an incredibly powerful nuclear deterrent.
I don't rule out modernization, and there are discussions going on now in the Congress, I know with the Pentagon, about a less expensive modernized land-based leg of the triad.
But there are limits to what we can spend.
There are limits to this nation's ability to finance these weapons systems.
And one of the things that the Vice President either ignores or won't address is the fact that you can't divorce our military security from our economic security.
How can we build a strong America militarily that's teeter-tottering on a mountain of debt?
And if we go forward with the kinds of policies that the Vice President is suggesting tonight and has in the past, that debt is going to grow bigger and bigger and bigger.
So military security and economic security go hand in hand.
And we will have a strong and effective and credible nuclear deterrent.
We're going to have conventional forces that are well maintained, well equipped, well trained, well supported.
And we have serious problems with our conventional forces at the present time, and they'll get worse unless we have a president who is willing to make some of these decisions.
And we also have important domestic priorities, in education and housing and health care, in economic development, in job training, in the environment.
And all of these things are going to have to be addressed.
That's why I say again to all of you out there who have to deal with your household budgets and know how difficult it is that the next President has to do the same.
I want the men and women of our Armed Forces to have the support they need to defend us; the support they need when they risk our lives to keep us free and to keep this country free.
But we cannot continue to live on a credit card.
We cannot continue to tell the American people that we're going to build all of these systems, and at the same time, invest in important things here at home, and be serious about building a strong and good America.
And that's the kind of America I want to build.
 I think the foremost (Applause)
 Can we start the clock over?
I held off for the applause.
 I think the foremost responsibility of a president really gets down to the national security of this country.
The Governor talks about limits, what we can't do, opposes these two modernization systems, talks now about well, we'll develop some new kind of a missile.
It takes eight years, ten years, to do that.
He talked about a nuclear freeze back at the time when I was in Europe trying to convince European public opinion that we ought to go forward with the deployment of the INF weapons.
And thank God, the freeze people were not heard.
They were wrong.
And the result is, we deployed, and the Soviets kept deploying, and then we negotiated from strength.
And now we have the first arms control agreement in the nuclear age to ban weapons.
You just don't make unilateral cuts in the naive hope that the Soviets are going to behave themselves.
World peace is important, and we have enhanced the peace.
And I'm proud to have been a part of an administration that has done exactly that.
Peace through strength works.
 Well, I think when I think of heroes, I think back, not presently, Ann.
But there are many people who I admire in this country today.
Some of them are in public life in the Senate, the Congress.
Some of my fellow governors who are real heroes to me.
I think of those young athletes who represented us at the Olympics were tremendously impressive.
We were proud of them.
We felt strongly about them, and they did so well by us.
I can think of doctors and scientists, Jonas Salk who for example discovered a vaccine which cured one of the most dread diseases we ever had.
And he's a hero.
I think of classroom teachers, classroom teachers that I have had, classroom teachers that youngsters have today who are real heroes to our young people.
Because they inspire them.
They teach them.
But more than that, they are role models.
Members of the clergy who have done the same.
Drug counselors out there in the street who are providing help to youngsters who come up to me and others who ask for help and want help, are doing the hard work, the heroic work, which it takes to provide that kind of leadership, that kind of counseling, that kind of support.
I think of people in the law enforcement community who are taking their lives in their hands everyday, when they go up to one of those doors and kick it down and try to stop this flow of drugs into our communities and into our kids.
So there are many, many heroes in this country today.
These are people that give of themselves everyday and every week and every month.
In many cases they are people in the community who are examples, and are role models.
And I would hope that one of the things I could do as president is to recognize them, to give them the kind of recognition that they need and deserve so that more and more young people can themselves become the heroes of tomorrow, can go into public service, can go into teaching, can go into drug counseling, can go into law enforcement, and be heroes themselves to generations yet to come.
 I think of a teacher right here, largely Hispanic school, Jaime Escalante, teaching calculus to young kids, 80 percent of them going on to college.
I think of a young man now in this country named Villadaris, who was released from a Cuban jail.
Came out and told the truth in this brilliant book, Against All Hope, about what is actually happening in Cuba.
I think of those people that took us back into space again, Rick Houk and that crew, as people that are worthy of this.
I agree with the Governor on athletics.
And there's nothing corny about having sports heroes, young people that are clean and honorable and out there setting the pace.
I think of Dr. Fauci.
Probably never heard of him.
You did, Ann heard of him.
He's a very fine research, top doctor, at the National Institute of Health, working hard doing something about research on this disease of AIDS.
But look, I also think we ought to give a little credit to the President of the United States.
He is the one who has gotten us that first arms control agreement.
 And the cynics abounded.
And he is leaving office with a popularity at an all-time high, because American people
 say, he is our hero.
(Applause)
 You're stealing my close.
I had something very nice to say in there.
 No, let me tell you something about that.
And Barbara and I were sitting there before that Democratic convention.
And we saw the Governor and his son on television the night before and his family, and his mother who was there.
And I'm saying to Barbara, you know, we've always kept family as a bit of an oasis for us.
You all know me, and we've held it back a little.
But we used that as a role model, the way he took understandable pride in his heritage, what his family means to him.
And we've got a strong family.
And we watched that.
And we said, hey, we've got to unleash the Bush kids.
And so you saw ten grandchildren there jumping all over their grandfather at the convention.
You see our five kids, all over this country, and their spouses.
And so I would say that the concept of the Dukakis family has my great respect.
And I would say, I don't know whether that's kind or not, it's just an objective statement.
I think the man anybody that gets into this political arena and has to face you guys everyday deserves a word of praise.
Because it's gotten a little ugly out there.
It's gotten a little nasty.
It's not much fun sometimes.
And I would cite again Dan Quayle.
I've been in politics a long time, and I don't remember that kind of piling on, that kind of ugly rumor that never was true, printed.
Now, come on.
So some of it is unfair.
But he's in the arena.
Teddy Roosevelt used to talk about the arena, you know, daring to fail greatly or succeed, no matter.
He's in there.
So I salute these things.
I salute those who participate in the political process.
Sam Raybum had a great expression on this.
He said here were all these intellectuals out there griping and complaining and saying it was negative coverage.
Rayburn says, yeah, and that guy never ran for sheriff either.
Michael Dukakis has run for sheriff, and so has George Bush.
 I didn't hear the word "liberal" or "left" one time.
I thank you for that.
 That's not bad.
That's true.
 And doesn't that prove the point, George, which is that values like family and education and community, decent homes for young people that family on Long Island I visited on Monday where Lou and Betty Tolamo (phonetic) bought a house for some $19,000 back in 1962, have had seven children, they're all making good livings.
They can't live in the community which they grew up in.
Those are basic American values.
I believe in them.
I think you believe in them.
They're not left or right.
They're decent American values.
I guess the one thing that concerns me about this, Ann, is this attempt to label things which all of us believe in.
We may have different approaches.
We may think that you deal with them in different ways.
But they're basically American, I believe in them.
George Bush believes in them.
I think the vast majority of Americans believe in them.
And I hope
 the tone we've just heard might just be the tone we have for the rest of the campaign.
I think the American people would appreciate that.
(Applause)
 Because you left out one other exception, the health of the mother.
Let me answer your question and I hope it doesn't get too personal or maudlin.
Barb and I lost a child, you know that we lost a daughter, Robin.
I was over running records in west Texas, and I got a call from her, come home; went to the doctor; the doctor said, beautiful child, your child has a few weeks to live.
And I said, what can we do about it.
He said, no, she has leukemia, acute leukemia, a few weeks to live.
We took the child to New York.
Thanks to the miraculous sacrifice of doctors and nurses, the child stayed alive for six months and then died.
If that child were here today, and I was told the same thing, my granddaughter, Noel for example that child could stay alive for ten or fifteen years, or maybe for the rest of her life.
And so I don't think that you make an exception based on medical knowledge at the time.
I think human life is very, very precious.
And, look, this hasn't been an easy decision for me to meet.
I know others disagree with it.
But when I was in that little church across the river from Washington and saw our grandchild christened in our faith, I was very pleased indeed that the mother had not aborted that child, and put the child up for adoption.
And so I just feel this is where I'm coming from.
And it is personal.
And I don't assail him on that issue, or others on that issue.
But that's the way I, George Bush, feel about it.
(Scattered applause)
 Margaret, Kitty and I had very much the same kind of experience that the Bushes had: we lost a baby, lived about twenty minutes after it was born.
But isn't the real question that we have to answer not how many exceptions we make, because the vice president himself is prepared to make exceptions.
It's who makes the decision, who makes this very difficult, very wrenching decision?
(Applause) And I think it has to be the woman, in the exercise of her own conscience and religious beliefs, that makes that decision.
Who are we to say, well, under certain circumstances, it's all right, but under other circumstances it isn't?
That's a decision that only a woman can make, after consulting her conscience and consulting her religious principles.
And I would hope that we would give to women in this country the right to make that decision, and to make it in the exercise of their conscience and religious beliefs.
(Applause)
 And, incidentally, may I say that that's the decision of the Congress, and the president has concurred.
 I think I was on the advisory committee, Margaret.
No, I don't happen to share that goal.
It's an example of how oftentimes we may be associated with organizations all of whose particular positions we don't support, even though we support in general the hope that over time, particularly if we can get those reductions in strategic weapons, if we can get a comprehensive test ban treaty, if we can negotiate with the Soviet Union and bring down the level of conventional forces in Europe with deeper cuts in the Soviet side, yes, at some point it may be possible to reduce defense outlays and use those for important things here at home, like jobs and job training and college opportunity and health and housing and the environment and the things that all of us care about.
But I do think this, that the next president, even within a relatively stable budget and that's what we are going to have for the foreseeable future will have to make those tough choices that I was talking about and that Mr. Bush doesn't seem to want to make.
And that really is going to be a challenge for the next president of the United States; I don't think there's any question about it.
But I also see a tremendous opportunity now to negotiate with the Soviet Union to build on the progress that we've made with the INF Treaty, which I strongly supported and most Democrats did to get those reductions in strategic weapons, to get a test ban treaty, and to really make progress on the reduction of conventional forces in Europe.
And if we can do that and do it in a way that gets deeper cuts on the Soviet side, which is where they ought to come from, then I think we have an opportunity over the long haul to begin to move some of our resources from the military to important domestic priorities that can provide college opportunity for that young woman whose mother wrote me from Texas just the other day, from Longview, Texas: two teachers, a mother and a father who have a child that's a freshman in college, an electrical engineering major, a very bright student and they can't afford to keep that child in college.
So I hope that we can begin to move those resources.
It's not going to happen overnight; it certainly will have to happen on a step-by-step basis as we make progress in arms negotiation and arms control and arms reduction.
But it certainly ought to be the long-term goal of all Americans and I think it is.
 The defense budget today takes far less percentage of the gross national product than it did in President Kennedy's time, for example moved tremendously.
And you see, I think we're facing a real opportunity for world peace.
This is a big question.
And it's a question as to whether the United States will continue to lead for peace.
See, I don't believe any other country can pick up the mantel.
I served at the UN.
I don't think we can turn over these kinds of decisions of the collective defense to the United Nations or anything else.
So, what I'm saying is, we are going to have to make choices.
I said I would have the Secretary of Defense sit down.
But while the President is negotiating with the Soviet Union, I simply do not want to make these unilateral cuts.
And I think those that advocated the freeze missed the point that there was a better way and that better way has resulted in a principle asymmetrical cuts.
The Soviets take out more than we do and the principle of intrusive verification.
And those two principles can now be applied to conventional forces, to strategic forces, provided
 We don't give away our hand before we sit down at the head table.
(Applause)
 And some domestic programs as well, Andrea.
 May I disagree with the premise of your question?
 As a matter of reality, Fm going to have to because we have had not one but two detailed studies which indicate that there are billions and billions of dollars to be collected that are not being paid these are not taxes owed by average Americans.
We don't have an alternative.
We'll lose it when it's taken out of our paycheck before we even get it.
But it's the Internal Revenue Service which estimates now that we aren't collecting $100 billion or more in taxes owed in this country.
And that is just absolutely unfair to the vast majority of Americans who pay their taxes and pay them on time.
The Dorgan Task Force, which included two internal revenue commissioners, one a Republican, one a Democrat.
It was a bipartisan commission, a study by two respected economists, which indicated that we could collect some 40, 45, 50 billion dollars of those funds.
The point is you've got to have a president who's prepared to do this and to begin right away and, preferably, a president who was a governor of a state that's had very, very successful experience at doing this.
In my own state, we did it.
In other states, we've done it.
Republican governors as well as Democratic governors.
And we've had great success at revenue enforcement.
Now, the Vice President will probably tell you that it's going to take an army of IRS collectors again.
Well, his campaign manager, who used to be the secretary of the treasury, was taking great credit about a year ago and asking and receiving from the Congress substantial additional funds to hire internal revenue agents to go out and collect these funds, and I'm happy to join Jim Baker in saying that we agree on this.
But, the fact of the matter is that this is something that we must begin it's going to take at least the first year of the new administration.
But, the Dorgan Task Force, the bipartisan task force estimated that we could collect about $35 billion in the fifth year, $105 billion over five years, the other study even more than that
 and that's where you begin.
 Well, Andrea, you didn't predicate that lack of economists' support for what I call a flexible freeze, because some good very good economists do support that concept.
And I think where I differ with the Governor of Massachusetts, because I am optimistic.
They jumped on me yesterday for being a little optimistic about the United States.
I am optimistic and I believe we can keep this longest expansion going.
I was not out there when that stock market dropped wringing my hands and saying this was the end of the world as some political leaders were, because it isn't the end of the world.
And what we have to do is restrain the growth of spending.
And we are doing a better job of it.
The Congress is doing a better job of it.
And the dynamics work.
But they don't work if you go raise taxes and then the Congress spends it continues to spend that.
The American working man and woman are not taxed too little.
The Federal Government continues to spend too much.
(Applause)
 Hold it.
 More so you than me.
 No, but you got to go back to what social security was when it was created.
It wasn't created as a welfare program.
It wasn't created that is it was created as a whole retirement or supplement to retirement program.
It wasn't created as a welfare program.
So, here's what's happened.
We came into office and the Social Security Trust Fund was in great jeopardy and the President took the leadership working with the Democrats and the Republicans in Congress some tough calls were made and the Social Security Trust Fund was put back into sound, solvent condition.
So, I don't want to fool around with it.
And there are several there's a good political reason because it's just about this time of year that the Democrats start saying the Republicans are going to take away your Social Security.
It always works that way.
I've seen it.
In precinct politics in Texas and I've seen it at the national level.
We have made the Social Security Trust Fund sound.
And it is going to be operating at surpluses and I don't want the liberal Democratic Congress to spend out of that Social Security Trust Fund or go and take the money out for some other purpose.
I don't want that.
And I will not go in there and suggest changes in Social Security.
I learned that the hard way and the Governor and I both supported slipping the COLAs for one year.
He supported it at the National Governors Conference and I supported it in breaking a tie in a major compromise package and we got assailed by the Democrats in the election over that.
And I am going to keep that Social Security Trust Fund sound and keep our commitment to the elderly and maybe down the line, maybe when you get two decades or one into the next century, you're going to have to take another look at it, but not now.
We do not have to do it.
Keep the trust with the older men and women of this country.
 Andrea, I don't know which George Bush I'm listening to.
George Bush, a few years ago, said that Social Security was basically a welfare system.
 Oh, come on.
 And in 1985, he flew back from the West Coast to cut that COLA.
I voted against that at the National Governors Association.
We won a majority, we didn't win the two-thirds that was necessary nor to pass that resolution, George.
But everybody knew what we were doing and I've opposed that.
The reason that we raise concerns, not just in election years, but every year, because Republicans, once they're elected and start cutting.
You did it in 1985.
The Administration tried to do it repeatedly, repeatedly in 81 82.
And I'm sure you'll try to do it again.
Because there's no way you can finance what you want to spend.
There's no way you can pay for that five year, $40 billion tax cut for the rich and still buy all those weapons systems you want to buy unless you raid the Social Security Trust Fund.
(Applause)
 One I don't have a list yet.
I feel pretty confident tonight, but not that confident.
(Laughter)
 Secondly, I don't have any litmus test.
But what I would do is appoint people to the Federal Bench that will not legislate from the Bench, who will interpret the Constitution.
I do not want to see us go to again and Fm using this word advisedly a liberal majority that is going to legislate from the Bench.
They don't like the use of the word, but may I remind his strong supporters that only last year in the primary, to capture that Democratic nomination, he said, "I am a progressive liberal Democrat."
I won't support judges like that.
There is no litmus test on any issue.
But I will go out there and find men and women to interpret.
And I don't have a list, but I think the appointments that the President has made to the Bench have been outstanding, outstanding appointments.
 Yeah.
I supported him.
(Applause)
 If the Vice President of the United States thinks that Robert Bork was an outstanding appointment (Cheers and Applause)
 that is a very good reason for voting for Mike Dukakis and Lloyd Bentsen on the 8th of November.
(Cheers and Applause)
 And I think the Vice President supported the Bork nomination.
You know, Mr. Bush has never appointed a judge.
I've appointed over 130, so I have a record.
(Laughter)
 And I'm very proud of it.
I don't ask people whether they're Republicans or Democrats.
I've appointed prosecutors, I've appointed defenders.
I don't appoint people I think are liberal or people who think - who I think are conservative.
I appoint people of independence and integrity and intelligence, people who will be a credit to the Bench.
And those are the standards that I will use in nominating people to the Supreme Court of the United States.
These appointments are for life.
These appointments are for life.
And when the Vice President talks about liberals on the Bench, I wonder who he's talking about?
Is he talking about a former Governor of the State of California, who is a former prosecutor, a Republican named Earl Warren, because I think Chief Justice Earl Warren was an outstanding Chief Justice and I think most Americans do too.
 Andrea, why do people who want balanced budgets or to bring the deficit down always go to those programs which tend to benefit people of very modest means?
Now, two-thirds of the people in this country who receive Social Security checks live entirely on that check; they have no other income.
And yet Mr. Bush tried to cut their cost of living increase in 1985.
Medicare is not getting less expensive; medical care for the elderly is getting more expensive, with greater deductibles, with fewer benefits, the kinds of things we've had under this Administration that have cut and chopped and reduced the kind of benefits that one gets under Medicare.
Yes, we now have catastrophic health insurance, but it's going to cost, and that's going to be an additional burden on elderly citizens.
It had bipartisan support; it should have had bipartisan support.
But I suggest that we understand that those are going to be additional costs on senior citizens across this country.
So I'm not going to begin, and I'm not going to go to entitlements as a means for cutting that deficit when we're spending billions on something like Star Wars, when we're spending billions on other weapon systems which apparently the Vice President wants to keep in his back pocket or some place, but which, if we continue to spend billions on them, will force us to cut Social Security, to cut Medicare, to cut these basic entitlements to people of very, very modest means.
Now there are some things we can do to help people who currently do get entitlements to get off public assistance.
I talked in our first debate about the possibilities of helping millions and millions of welfare families to get off of welfare, and I'm proud to say that we finally have a welfare reform bill And the Ruby Samsons and Dan Lawsons, hundreds of thousands of welfare mothers in this country and in my state and across the country who today are working and earning are examples of what can happen when you provide training to those welfare mothers, some daycare for their children so that those mothers can go into a training program and get a decent job.
 That's the way you bring a deficit down and help to improve the quality of life for people at the same time.
 I think I've addressed it.
But let me simply say for the record, I did not vote to cut COLAs.
And I voted the same way that he did three months before in a national governors' conference.
And he said at that time, in a quote, and this is a paraphrase, a freeze, that's easy.
So I don't believe that we need to do what you've suggested here.
And I've said that I'm going to keep this Social Security entitlement, to keep that trust fund sound.
But I do think there are flexible ways to solve some of the pressing problems, particularly that affect our children.
And I have made some good sound proposals.
But again, we have a big difference on child care, for example.
You see, I want the families to have the choice.
I don't want to see the Federal Government licensing grandmothers.
I don't want to see the Federal Government saying to communities, well, you can't do this any more.
We're going to tell you how to do it all.
I want flexibility, and I do you know, these people laugh about the thousand points of light.
You ought to go out and see around this country what's happening in the volunteer section: Americans helping America.
And I want to keep it alive in child care and in other entitlements.
 That is absolutely not true.
 That is absolutely not true.
It had nothing to do with the debate on Social Security.
It had to do with the discussion we had had the previous day on the overall question of reducing the budget.
 No, and I have to (Applause)
 I just have to correct the record.
That simply isn't true.
Now, we're not a parliamentary body, the National Governors Association.
We vote on resolutions.
If you don't get a two-thirds, then your resolution doesn't pass.
But everybody knew that those of us who voted against the freezing of COLAs did so, we did so emphatically.
And I never made that statement; never would.
The point is that as we look at this nation's future, and we have two very different visions of this future.
I want to move ahead.
The Vice President talks about a thousand points of light.
I'm interested in 240 million points of light.
I'm interested in 240 million citizens in this country who share in the American dream, all of them in every part of this country.
But as we look at the decisions that the next president of the United States is going to have to make, I just don't believe the place you go first is those programs, those so-called entitlements, which provide a basic floor of income and a modest amount of medical care for the elderly, the disabled, for people who can't make their way on their own, and in many cases, have given a great deal to this country.
The Vice President did call Social Security a few years ago basically or largely a welfare program.
It isn't.
It's a contract between generations.
It's something that we pay into now so that we will have a secure retirement, and our parents and grandparents will have a secure retirement.
It's a very sacred contract, and I believe in it.
So that's not where we ought to go.
There are plenty of places to cut.
There's lots we can do in the Pentagon where dishonest contractors have been lining their pockets at the expense of the American taxpayer.
There are we certainly ought to be able to
 Give our farm families a decent income with spending $20to $25 billion a year on farm subsidies, and I'm sure we can do that.
That's where we ought to go, and those are the programs we ought to review first.
 Well, let me take him up on this question of farm subsidies.
We have a fundamental difference, approach on agriculture.
He favors this supply maintenance or production controls.
He said that.
He's been out in the state saying that, in Midwestern states.
I don't.
I think the farm bill that he criticizes was good legislation, outstanding legislation.
And I believe the answer to the agricultural economy is not to get the government further involved, but to do what I'm suggesting.
In the first place, never go back to that Democratic grain embargo, that liberal Democrat grain embargo that knocked the markets right out from under us and made Mr. Gorbachev say to me when I was here, how do I know you're reliable suppliers?
We never should go back to that.
And we ought to expand our markets abroad.
We ought to have rural enterprise zones.
We ought to move forward swiftly on my ideas of ethanol which would use more corn, and therefore, create a bigger market for our agricultural products.
But let's not go back and keep assailing a farm bill that passed with overwhelming Democrat and Republican support.
 The farm payments are going down because the agricultural economy is coming back.
 90 percent reductions in lead since I chaired that regulatory task force; 90 percent.
It's almost you remember that expression, get the lead out?
It's almost out.
Almost gone.
Clean water?
I'm for clean water.
But what I'm not for what I'm not for is measuring it the way that the Democratic Congress does.
We sent up a good bill on clean water, a sound bill on clean water.
But the only way you can express your love for clean water is to double the appropriations for clean water, and then rant against the deficit.
I am for clean water.
I've been an outdoorsman and a sportsman all my life.
I've been to these national parks.
I led for the Earl Wallop bill or formerly Dingell-Johnson.
I headed the task force when I was a member of the Congress way back in the late '60s on these kinds of things, on the Republican side.
I led for that.
And so I refuse to measure one's commitment as to whether you're going to double the spending.
That is the same old argument that's gotten us into trouble on the deficit side.
So I'll just keep saying, I am one.
I'm not going to go down there and try to dump the sludge from Massachusetts off the beaches off of New Jersey.
I'm not going to do that.
That boo was excessively loud.
Can you add five seconds, Bernie, out of fairness?
Come on, give me five.
I mean, this guy, this is too much.
But I'm not going to do that.
I'm an environmentalist.
I believe in our parks.
I believe in the President's commission on outdoors.
And I'll do a good job, because I am committed.
 Margaret, I'm not sure I can get all of this in in one minute.
George, we have supply management today under the 1985 bill.
It's called set-asides.
Secondly, if you were so opposed to the grain embargo, why did you ask the godfather of the grain embargo to be one of your top foreign policy advisers?
I'm against the grain embargo; it was a mistake.
I'm also against the pipeline embargo, which you folks attempted to impose.
That was a mistake as well, and it cost thousands of jobs for American workers in the Midwest and all over the United States of America.
Margaret, once again, I don't know which George Bush I'm talking about here or looking at.
The George Bush who was the charter member of the environmental wrecking crew that went to Washington in the early '80s and did a job on the EPA, or the one we've been seeing and listening to the past two or three months.
But let me say this, because he spent millions and millions of dollars of advertising on the subject of Boston Harbor.
George, Boston Harbor was polluted for 100 years.
I'm the first governor to clean it up.
No thanks to you.
No thanks to you.
We've been cleaning it up for four years.
We passed landmark legislation in '84.
No thanks to you.
You did everything you could to kill the Clean Water Act
 And those grants which make it possible for states and local communities to clean up rivers and harbors and streams.
(Applause)
 No.
I will not agree to another debate.
The American people are up to here with debates.
They had thirty of them; we had seven of them.
Now we've got three of them.
I am going to carry this election debate all across this country in the last whatever remains of the last three and a half weeks, or whatever we have and the answer is no; I am not going to have any more debates, we don't need any more debates.
I've spelled out my position.
In terms of negative campaigning, you know, I don't want to sound like a kid in the schoolyard: he started it.
But take a look at the Democratic convention take a look at it.
Do you remember the Senator from Boston chanting out there and the ridicule factor from that lady from Texas that was on there; I mean, come on, this was just outrageous.
But I'll try harder to keep it on a high plane.
If you could accept a little criticism, I went all across central Illinois and spoke about agricultural issues, about seven stops.
We had some fun Crystal Gayle and Loretta Lynn with us, and they got up and sang, went to little towns and I talked agriculture.
And not one thing did I see, with respect, on your network about my views on agriculture, and not one did I read in any newspaper.
Why?
Because you are so interested in a poll that might have been coming out, or because somebody had said something nasty about somebody else.
And so I don't know what the answer is.
Somebody hit me and said Barry Goldwater said you ought to talk on issues more.
How can Barry Goldwater sitting in Arizona know whether I'm talking on the issues or not when we put out position paper after position paper, he puts out position paper after position paper; and we see this much about it, because everyone else is fascinated with polls and who's up or down today and who's going to be up or down tomorrow.
So I think we can all share, with respect, in the fact that maybe the message is not getting out.
But it's not getting out because there are too few debates.
There will be no more debates.
(Applause)
 I can understand, after the vice presidential debate, why Mr. Bush would want no more debates.
(Laughter, boos) That's my five seconds.
Andrea, I think we both have a responsibility to try to address the issues.
Yes, we have fundamental differences.
I think a great many of them have come out today.
And I think if we get rid of the labels--and I'm not keeping count, but I think Mr. Bush has used the label "liberal" at least ten times if I had a dollar, George, for every time you used that label, I'd qualify for one of those tax breaks for the rich that you want to give away.
(Laughter, applause) Isn't that the point?
Most Americans believe in basic values.
We have differences about how to achieve them.
I want to move forward, I want this nation to move forward.
I am concerned about the fact that 10 percent of our manufacturing and 20 percent of our banking and nearly half of the real estate in the city of Los Angeles are in the hands of foreign investors.
I am concerned about what that does to our future.
I'm concerned about the fact that so many of our securities are in the hands of foreign banks because of these massive deficits.
But those are the issues on which we ought to be debating and if we can just put away the flag factories and the balloons and those kinds of thing and get on to a real discussion of these issues, I think we will have a good success.
 I think we ought to be looking at modernization, I think we ought to be exploring less expensive ways to get it on land, and we ought to make sure that we have an effective and strong and credible nuclear deterrent.
But we also need well-equipped and well-trained and well-supported conventional forces.
And every defense expert I know, including people in the Pentagon itself, will tell you that given the level of defense spending and the level of defense appropriations which the Congress has now approved and the president has signed, there's no way that you can do all of these things and do them well.
That's why tough choices will be required, choices I am prepared to make, Mr. Bush is not prepared to make.
But, Andrea, I think we can go far beyond this as well, because we have opportunities now step-by-step to bring down the level of strategic weapons, get a test ban treaty, negotiate those conventional force reductions.
I would challenge Mr. Gorbachev to join with us in limiting in eliminating regional conflict in the Middle East, in Central America.
Let's get him working on Syria, their client state, and see if we can't get them to join Israel and other Arab nations, if at all possible, and Arab leaders, in finally bringing peace to that troubled region.
And I think that's one reason why we need fresh leadership in the White House that can make progress now in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Let's go to work and end this fiasco in Central America, a failed policy which has actually increased Cuban and Soviet influence.
The democratic leaders of Central and Latin America want to work with us.
I've met with them, I know them, I've spent time in South America-speak the language, so does Senator Bentsen.
We want to work with them and build a new relationship, and they with us.
But not a one of those key democratic leaders support our policy in Central America.
And we've got to work with them if we are going to create an environment for human rights and democracy for the people of this hemisphere, and go to work on our single most important problem, and that is the avalanche of drugs that is poring into our country and virtually destroying those countries.
Those are the kinds of priorities for national security and for foreign policy that I want to pursue Mr. Bush and I have major differences on these issues and I hope very much to be president and pursue them.
 In terms of regional tensions, we have now gotten the attention of the Soviet Union.
And the reason we've gotten it is because they see us now as unwilling to make the very kinds of unilateral cuts that have been called for and to go for the discredited freeze.
My opponent had trouble, criticized us, on our policy in Angola.
It now looks, because of steady negotiation, that we may have an agreement that will remove the Cubans from Angola.
We see the Russians coming out of Afghanistan.
That wouldn't have stopped if we hadn't been willing wouldn't have even started, the Soviets coming out, if we hadn't even been willing to support the freedom fighters there.
And the policy in Central America, regrettably, has failed because the Congress has been unwilling to support those who have been fighting for freedom.
Those Sandinistas came in and betrayed the trust of the revolution; they said it was about democracy, and they have done nothing other than solidify their Marxist domination over that country.
 Well, it's a great concern of mine and I think of all Americans, and perhaps the vice president can tell us what's been going on.
This is another example of misplaced priorities.
An administration which wants to billions on weapons systems that we don't need and can't afford, and now confronts us with a very serious problem, and plants that are supposed to be producing tritium and plutonium and providing the necessary materials for existing weapons.
Yes, if we don't do something about it, we may find ourselves unilaterally, if I may use that term, dismantling some of these weapons.
What's been going on?
Who's been in charge?
Who's been managing this system?
Why have there been these safety violations?
Why are these plants being closed down?
I don't know what the latest cost estimates are, but it's going to be in the range of 25, 50, 75, $100 billion.
Now, somebody has to bear the responsibility for this.
Maybe the Vice President has an answer.
But I'm somebody who believes very strongly in taking care of the fundamentals first before you start new stuff.
And that's something which will be a priority of ours in the new administration because without it, we cannot have the effective and strong and credible nuclear deterrent we must have.
 That is the closest I have ever heard the Governor of Massachusetts come to support anything having to do with nuclear, that's about as close as I've ever heard him Yes, this Savannah River plant needs to be made more safe.
Will he join me in suggesting that we may need another plant?
Maybe in Idaho, to take care of the requirements, nuclear material requirements, for our Defense Department?
I hope he will.
This sounds like real progress here, because we've had a big difference on the safe use of nuclear power for our energy base.
I believe that we must use clean, safe nuclear power.
I believe that the more dependent we become on foreign oil, the less our national security is enhanced.
And therefore, I've made some proposals to strengthen the domestic oil industry by more incentive going in to look for, and find, and produce oil; made some incentives in terms of secondary and tertiary production.
But we're going to have to use more gas, more coal and more safe nuclear power for our energy base.
So I am one who believes that we can
 and must do what he's talking about now.
 Yes, and I'll apply it to Congress too.
I'll do both.
I'll do both.
Because I think you see, I am one who I get kidded by being a little old fashioned on these things, but I do believe in public service.
I believe that public service is honorable.
And I don't think anybody has a call on people in their Administrations going astray.
His chief education adviser is in jail He's in jail because he betrayed the public trust.
The head of education.
And yet this man, the governor, equated the President to a rotting fish.
He said that a fish rots from the head down as he was going after Ed Meese.
Look, we need the highest possible ethical standards.
I will have an ethical office in the White House that will be under the President's personal concern.
I will see that these standards apply to the United States Congress.
I hope I will do a good job as one who has had a relatively clean record with no conflicts of interest in his own public life, as has the Governor, to exhort young people to get into public service.
But there is no corner on this sleaze factor, believe me.
And it's a disgrace, and I will do my level best to clean it up, recognizing that you can't legislate morality.
But I do believe that with my record in Congress, having led the new Congressmen to a code of ethics through major main emphasis on it in full disclosure, that I've got a good record.
And there are more, if you want to talk about percentage appointments, more Members of Congress who have been under investigation percentage-wise that people in the executive branch.
And so it isn't one and state governments have had a tough time.
His some of his college presidents aren't exactly holier than thou.
So let's not be throwing stones about it.
Let's say, this isn't Democrat or Republican, and it isn't liberal or conservative.
Let's vow to work together to do something about it.
 And I would agree that integrity is not a Republican or a Democratic issue; it's an American issue.
But here again, I don't know which George Bush I'm listening to.
Wasn't this the George Bush that supported Mr. Meese?
Called James Watt an excellent Secretary of the Interior?
Provided support for some of these people, supported the nomination of Robert Bork to the Supreme Court of the United States.
We've had dozens we've had dozens and dozens of officials in this Administration who have left under a cloud, who have left with the special prosecutor in their arm, have been indicted, convicted.
This isn't the kind of Administration we need.
And one of the reasons our selection of a running mate is so important, it is such a test of the kinds of standards we'll set, is because it tells the American people in advance of the election just what kind of people we're looking for.
I picked Lloyd Bentsen.
Mr. Bush picked Dan Quayle.
I think that says a great deal to the American people about the standards we'll set and the quality of the people that we will pick to serve in our Administration.
 28 years ago, as a young man just graduated from law school, I came to this city, came clear across the country, to watch John Kennedy be nominated for the presidency of the United States, right here in Los Angeles.
I never dreamed that some day I would win that nomination and be my party's nominee for president.
That's America.
That's why I'm proud and grateful to be a citizen of this country.
26 days from today you and millions of Americans will choose two people to lead us into the future as president and vice president of the United States.
Our opponents say, things are okay.
Don't rock the boat.
Not to worry.
They say we should be satisfied.
But I don't think we can be satisfied when we're spending $150 billion a year in interest alone on the national debt, much of it going to foreign bankers; or when 25 percent of our high school students are dropping out of school; or when we have 2-1/2 million of our fellow citizens, a third of them veterans, who are homeless and living on streets and in doorways in this country, when Mr. Bush's prescription for our economic future is another tax giveaway to the rich.
We can do better than that.
Not working with government alone, but all of us working together.
Lloyd Bentsen and I are optimists, and so are the American people.
And we ask you for our hand for your hands and your hearts, and your votes on the 8th of November so we can move forward in the future.
Kitty and I are very grateful to all of you for the warmth and the hospitality that you've given to us in your homes and communities all across this country.
We love you, and we're grateful to you for everything that you've given to us.
And we hope that we'll be serving you in the White House in January of 1989.
Thank you, and God bless you.
(Applause)
 Sometimes it does seem that a campaign generates more heat than light.
So let me repeat, I do have respect for my opponent, for his family, for the justifiable pride he takes in his heritage.
But we have enormous differences.
I want to hold the line on taxes, and keep this the longest expansion in modern history going until everybody in America benefits.
I want to invest in our children.
Because I mean it when I say I want a kinder and gentler nation.
And by that I want to have child care where the families, the parents, have control.
I want to keep our neighborhoods much, much better in terms of anti-crime, and that's why I would appoint judges that have a little more sympathy for the victims of crime and a little less for the criminals.
That's why I do feel if some police officer is gunned down that the death penalty is required.
I want to help those with disabilities fit into the mainstream.
There is much to be done.
This election is about big things.
And perhaps the biggest is world peace.
And I ask you to consider the experience I have had in working with a President who has revolutionized the situation around the world.
America stands tall again, and as a result, we are credible.
And we have now achieved an historic arms control agreement.
I want to build on that.
I'd love to be able to say to my grandchildren, four years after my first term, I'd like to say, your grandfather, working with the leaders of the Soviet Union, working with the leaders of Europe, was able to ban chemical and biological weapons from the face of the earth.
Lincoln called this country the last best hope of man on earth.
And he was right then, and we still are the last best hope of man on earth.
And I ask for your support on November 8th.
And I will be a good president.
Working together, we can do wonderful things for the United States and the Free World.
Thank you very, very much.
 Let's go.
 That's right at the top of my agenda.
We've shipped millions of jobs overseas and we have a strange situation because we have a process in Washington where after you've served for a while you cash in, become a foreign lobbyist, make $30,000 a month, then take a leave, work on presidential campaigns, make sure you've got good contacts and then go back out.
 Carole, the thing that saved us in this global economic slowdown has been our exports, and what I'm trying to do is increase our exports.
And if indeed all the jobs were going to move south because there are lower wages, there are lower wages now and they haven't done that.
And so I have just negotiated with the president of Mexico the North American Free Trade Agreement -- and the prime minister of Canada, I might add -- and I want to have more of these free trade agreements, because export jobs are increasing far faster than any jobs that may have moved overseas.
That's a scare tactic, because it's not that many.
But any one that's here, we want to have more jobs here.
And the way to do that is to increase our exports.
 I'd like to answer the question, because I've actually been a governor for 12 years, so I've known a lot of people who have lost their jobs because of jobs moving overseas, and I know a lot of people whose plants have been strengthened by increasing exports.
 No, and here's why.
And I'll tell you exactly why.
Because the deficit now has been building up for 12 years.
I'll tell you exactly what I think can be done.
I think we can bring it down by 50% in 4 years and grow the economy.
Now, I could get rid of it in 4 years in theory on the books now, but to do it you'd have to raise taxes too much and cut benefits too much to people who need them and it would even make the economy worse.
 Well, I'm a little confused here, because I don't see how you can grow the deficit down by raising people's taxes.
You see, I don't think the American people are taxed too little.
I think they're taxed too much.
I went for one tax increase and when I make a mistake I admit it.
I said that wasn't the right thing to do.
 Well, we're $4 trillion in debt.
We're going into debt an additional $1 billion, little more than $1 billion every working day of the year.
 No, I don't have an answer for everything.
As you all know, I've been buying 30-minute segments to talk about issues.
And tomorrow night on NBC, from 10:30 to 11 Eastern, we're going to talk about how you pay the debt down, so we're going to come right down to that one.
We'll be on again Saturday night, 8 to 9 o'clock on ABC.
So the point is --
 Like Jerry Brown, the 800 number.
 -- I couldn't agree with you more, couldn't agree with you more.
And I have said again and again and again let's get off mud wrestling, let's get off personalities and let's talk about jobs, health care, crime, the things that concern the American people.
I'm spending my money -- not PAC money, not foreign money, my money -- to take this message to the people.
 Well, in the first place, I believe that character is a part of being president.
I think you have to look at it.
I think that has to be a part of a candidate for president or being president.
In terms of programs, I've submitted, what, 4 different budgets to the US Congress in great detail.
It's so heavy they'd give you a broken back.
And everything in there says what I am for.
 Excuse me.
I don't want to --
 I don't want to --
 I get wound up because I feel strongly --
 Let me say first of all to you that I believe so strongly in the question you asked that I suggested this format tonight.
I started doing these formats a year ago in New Hampshire and I found that we had huge crowds because all I did was let people ask questions and I tried to give very specific answers.
I also had a program starting last year.
I've been disturbed by the tone and the tenor of this campaign.
Thank goodness the networks have a fact check so I don't have to just go blue in the face anymore.
Mr. Bush said once again I was going to have $150 billion tax increase.
When Mr. Quayle said that all the networks said, that's not true.
He's got over $100 billion of tax cuts and incentives.
 Please don't get into the Washington Post.
 Wait a minute.
Let's don't -- you don't have to believe it.
Here's my point.
I'm not interested in his character.
I want to change the character of the presidency.
And I'm interested in what we can trust him to do and what you can trust me to do and what you can trust Mr. Perot to do for the next 4 years.
So I think you're right and I hope the rest of the night belongs to you.
 I agree with him.
 Let's do it.
 Let's do it.
Let's talk about programs for children.
 I think it depends how you define it.
I mean, I think in general, let's talk about these issues.
Let's talk about the programs.
But in the presidency, a lot goes into it.
Caring goes into it.
That's not particularly specific.
Strength goes into it.
That's not specific.
Standing up against aggression.
That's not specific in terms of a program.
This is what a president has to do.
 Ross had his hand up.
 Just no hedges, no ifs, ands and buts.
I'll take the pledge because I know the American people want to talk about issues and not tabloid journalism.
So I'll take the pledge and will stay on the issues.
 Wait a minute.
I want to say just one thing now, Ross, in fairness.
The ideas I express are mine.
I've worked on these things for 12 years and I'm the only person up here who hasn't been part of Washington in any way for the last 20 years.
So I don't want the implication to be that somehow everything we say is just cooked up and put in our head by somebody else.
I worked 12 years very hard as a governor on the real problems of real people.
I'm just as sick as you are by having to wake up and figure out how to defend myself every day.
I never thought I'd ever be involved in anything like this.
 May I finish?
 Very briefly?
 And I don't have any foreign money in my campaign.
I don't have any foreign lobbyists on leave in my campaign.
I don't have any PAC money in my campaign.
I've got 5.5 million hard-working people who put me on the ballot, and I belong to them.
And they're interested in what you're interested in.
 I'll be glad to take a shot at it.
 I'm not sure that -- and I can understand if you haven't seen this, because there's been a lot of hue and cry.
We passed this year the most furthest looking transportation bill in the history of this country since Eisenhower started the interstate highways -- $150 billion for improving the infrastructure.
That happened when I was president.
And so I'm very proud of the way that came about and I think it's a very, very good beginning.
 Sure, but the problem is, you get so many things included in a great big bill that you have to look at the overall good.
That's the problem with our system.
If you had a line item veto you could knock out the pork.
You could knock out the tax increases and you could do what the people want, and that's create enterprise zones.
 That bill pays for these urban enterprise zones by asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more.
And that's why he wants to veto it, just like he vetoed an earlier bill this year.
This is not mud slinging.
This is fact slinging -- a bill earlier this year.
This is facts -- that would have given investment tax credits and other incentives to reinvest in our cities, in our country.
But it asked the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more.
Mr. Perot wants to do the same thing.
I agree with him.
I mean, we agree with that.
 First you've got to have money to pay for these things.
So you've got to create jobs.
There are all kinds of ways to create jobs in the inner city.
I'm not a politician, but I think I could go to Washington in a week and get everybody holding hands and get this bill signed because I talk to the Democratic leaders and they want it.
I talk to the Republican leaders and they want it.
But since they're bred from childhood to fight with one another rather than get results, you know, I would be glad to drop out and spend a little time and see if we couldn't build some bridges.
 If you ask me if I could fly a fighter plane or be an astronaut, I can't.
I've spent my life creating jobs.
That's something I know how to do.
And, very simply, in the inner city, they're starved -- you see, small business is the way to jump start the inner city, not --
 You want jobs in the inner city?
Do you want jobs in the inner city?
Is that your question?
 Oh, I'm sorry.
Well, I've listened to both sides, and if they would talk to one another instead of throwing rocks, I think we could get a lot done.
And, among other things, I would say, okay, over here in this Senate committee to the chairman who is anxious to get this bill passed, the president who is anxious, I'd say rather than just yelling at one another, why don't we find out where we're apart, try to get together, get the bill passed and give the people the benefits and not play party politics right now.
And I think the press would follow that so closely that probably they would get it done.
 I support the right to keep and bear arms.
I live in a state where over half the adults have hunting or fishing licenses, or both.
But I believe we have to have some way of checking hand guns before they're sold, to check the criminal history, the mental health history, and the age of people who are buying them.
Therefore I support the Brady bill which would impose a national waiting period unless and until a state did what only Virginia has done now, which is to automate its records.
Once you automate your records, then you don't have to have a waiting period, but at least you can check.
 I think you put your finger on a major problem.
I talk about strengthening the American family and it's very hard to strengthen the family if people are scared to walk down to the corner store and, you know, send their kid down to get a loaf of bread.
It's very hard.
 I didn't get to make a comment on this.
 Oh, you're going to let me.
Excuse me.
 On any program, and this includes crime, you'll find we have all kinds of great plans lying around that never get enacted into law and implemented.
I don't care what it is -- competitiveness, health care, crime, you name it.
Brady Bill, I agree that it's a timid step in the right direction but it won't fix it.
So why pass a law that won't fix it?
Now, what it really boils down to is can you live -- we become so preoccupied with the rights of the criminal that we've forgotten the rights of the innocent.
And in our country we have evolved to a point where we've put millions of innocent people in jail because you go to the poor neighborhoods and they've put bars on their windows and bars on their doors and put themselves in jail to protect the things that they acquired legitimately.
That's where we are.
 Any order?
I'll be glad to respond.
 I strongly support term limits for members of the US Congress.
I believe it would return the government closer to the people, the way that Ross Perot is talking about.
The president's terms are limited to 2, a total of 8 years.
What's wrong with limiting the terms of members of Congress to 12?
Congress has gotten kind of institutionalized.
For 38 years one party has controlled the House of Representatives, and the result, a sorry little post office that can't do anything right and a bank that has more overdrafts than all the Chase Bank and Citibank put together.
We've got to do something about it.
 I know they're popular, but I'm against them.
I'll tell you why.
I believe, number one, it would pose a real problem for a lot of smaller states in the Congress who have enough trouble now making sure their interests are heard.
Number 2, I think it would increase the influence of unelected staff members in the Congress who have too much influence already.
I want to cut the size of the congressional staffs, but I think you're going to have too much influence there with people who were never elected, who have lots of expertise.
 Yes.
Let me do first on a personal level.
If the American people send me up to do this job, I intend to be there one term.
I do not intend to spend one minute of one day thinking about re-election.
And as a matter of principle -- and my situation is unique, and I understand it -- I would take absolutely no compensation; I go as their servant.
 I've had more people talk to me about their health care problems I guess than anything else, all across America -- you know, people who've lost their jobs, lost their businesses, had to give up their jobs because of sick children.
So let me try to answer you in this way.
Let's start with a premise.
We spend 30% more of our income than any nation on earth on health care, and yet we insure fewer people.
We have 35 million people without any insurance at all -- and I see them all the time.
A hundred thousand Americans a month have lost their health insurance just in the last 4 years.
 I just have to say something.
I don't want to stampede.
Ross was very articulate across the country.
I don't want anybody to stampede to cut the president's salary off altogether.
Barbara's sitting over here and I -- but what I have proposed, 10% cut, downsize the government, and we can get that done.
 We have the most expensive health care system in the world.
Twelve percent of our gross national product goes to health care.
Our industrial competitors, who are beating us in competition, spend less and have better health care.
Japan spends a little over 6% of its gross national product.
Germany spends 8%.
 One brief point.
We have elections so people can make decisions about this.
The point I want to make to you is, a bipartisan commission reviewed my plan and the Bush plan and there were as many Republicans as Democratic health care experts on it.
They concluded that my plan would cover everybody and his would leave 27 million behind by the year 2000 and that my plan in the next 12 years would save $2.2 trillion in public and private money to reinvest in this economy and the average family would save $1200 a year under the plan that I offered without any erosion in the quality of health care
 May I answer that?
 Who do you want to start with?
 It caused me to disrupt my private life and my business to get involved in this activity.
That's how much I care about it.
And believe me, if you knew my family and if you knew the private life I have, you would agree in a minute that that's a whole lot more fun than getting involved in politics.
 Well, I think the national debt affects everybody.
 Obviously it has a lot to do with interest rates --
 I'm sure it has.
I love my grandchildren --
 I want to think that they're going to be able to afford an education.
I think that that's an important part of being a parent.
If the question -- maybe I -- get it wrong.
Are you suggesting that if somebody has means that the national debt doesn't affect them?
 I'm not sure I get -- help me with the question and I'll try to answer it.
 Yeah.
 Well, listen, you ought to be in the White House for a day and hear what I hear and see what I see and read the mail I read and touch the people that I touch from time to time.
I was in the Lomax AME Church.
It's a black church just outside of Washington, DC.
And I read in the bulletin about teenage pregnancies, about the difficulties that families are having to make ends meet.
I talk to parents.
I mean, you've got to care.
Everybody cares if people aren't doing well.
 Tell me how it's affected you again.
 You know people who've lost their jobs and lost their homes?
 Well, I've been governor of a small state for 12 years.
I'll tell you how it's affected me.
Every year Congress and the president sign laws that make us do more things and gives us less money to do it with.
I see people in my state, middle class people -- their taxes have gone up in Washington and their services have gone down while the wealthy have gotten tax cuts.
 Well, the Social Security -- you're an expert and I could, I'm sure, learn from you the details of the Pension Guarantee Fund and the Social Security Fund.
The Social Security system was fixed about 5 years, and I think it's projected out to be sound beyond that.
So at least we have time to work with it.
 On the broad issue here, when you're trying to solve a problem, you get the best plans.
You have a raging debate about those plans.
Then out of that debate, with leadership, comes consensus.
Then, if the plans are huge and complex like health care, I would urge you to implement pilot programs.
Like the old carpenter says measure twice, cut once.
Let's make sure this thing's as good as we all think it is at the end of the meeting.
 Do you want to fix the problem or sound-bite it?
I understand the importance of time but see, here's how we get to this mess we're in.
 This is just 1 of 1000.
 Sorry.
 Okay.
 Absolutely.
I apologize.
 I think I remember the question.
 Well, we have come to that position.
Since I became president, 43, 44 countries have gone democratic, no longer totalitarian, no longer living under dictatorship or communist rule.
This is exciting.
New world order to me means freedom and democracy.
I think we will have a continuing responsibility, as the only remaining superpower, to stay involved.
If we pull back in some isolation and say we don't have to do our share, or more than our share, anymore, I believe you are going to just ask for conflagration that we'll get involved in the future.
 Well, it's cost-effective to help Russia succeed in its revolution; it's pennies on the dollar compared to going back to the Cold War.
Russia is still very unstable; they could go back to square one, and worse.
All the nuclear weapons are not dismantled.
I am particularly concerned about the intercontinental weapons, the ones that can hit us.
We've got agreements, but they are still there.
 I'd rather answer her question first and then I'll be glad to.
Because the question you ask is important.
The end of the Cold War brings an incredible opportunity for change.
Winds of freedom blowing around the world, Russia demilitarizing.
And it also requires us to maintain some continuity -- some bipartisan American commitment to certain principles.
And I would just say there are three things that I would like to say -- number one -- we do have to maintain the world's strongest defense.
We may differ about what the elements of that are.
 Go ahead, sir.
Yeah, go ahead.
 I'd be delighted to, because you can't do it the old way.
You can't do it with the school bureaucracy controlling everything and that's why we have a new program that I hope people have heard about.
It's being worked now in 1700 communities -- bypassed Congress on this one, Ross -- 1700 communities across the country.
It's called America 2000.
And it literally says to the communities, re-invent the schools, not just the bricks and mortar but the curriculum and everything else.
Think anew.
We have a concept called the New American School Corporation where we're doing exactly that.
 First of all, let me say that I've spent more of my time and life on this in the last 12 years than any other issue.
Seventy percent of my state's money goes to the public schools, and I was really honored when Time magazine said that our schools have shown more improvement than any other state in the country except one other -- they named 2 states showing real strides forward in the 80s.
So I care a lot about this, and I've spent countless hours in schools.
 In 6 years -- I budget all this in my budget, and in 6 years the college program would cost 8 billion dollars over and above what -- the present student loan program costs 4; you pay 3 billion dollars for busted loans, because we don't have an automatic recovery system, and a billion dollars in bank fees.
So the net cost would be 8 billion 6 years from now in a trillion-plus budget -- not very much.
 Yes, I've got scars to show for being around education reform.
And the first word you need to say in every city and state, and just draw a line in the sand, is public schools exist for the benefit of the children.
You're going to see a lot of people fall over it, because any time you're spending $199 billion dollars a year, somebody's getting it.
And the children get lost in the process.
So that's step one.
 Finally, if we don't fix this, you're right.
We can't have the industries of tomorrow unless we have the best educated workforce.
And here you've got, for the disadvantaged children, you've got to have early childhood development.
Cheapest money you'll ever spend.
First contact should be with the money when she's pregnant.
That little child needs to be loved and hugged and nurtured and made to feel special, like your children were.
They learn to think well or poorly of themselves in the first 18 months.
 And in the first few years they either learn how to learn or don't learn how to learn.
And if they don't, they wind up in prison.
 And it costs more to keep them in prison than it does to send them to Harvard.
I rest my case.
 I just had a word of clarification because of something Governor Clinton said.
 I just want to mention if I could --
 Very briefly.
Including the parents in the preschool education of their kids, even if they're poor and uneducated, can make a huge difference.
We have a big program in my state that teaches mothers or fathers to teach their kids to get ready for school.
It's the most successful thing we've ever done.
 Well, I don't have any idea but I hope it will happen some time in my lifetime.
 I believe that this country is electing more and more African Americans and Latinos and Asian Americans who are representing districts that are themselves not necessarily of a majority of their race.
The American people are beginning to vote across racial lines, and I hope it will happen more and more.
 I think if Barbara Bush were running this year she'd be elected.
But it's too late.
 You weren't impressed with the fact that he --
 Yeah, but wouldn't that suggest to the American people, then, here's a quality person, if he decided that he could automatically get the nomination of either party?
 Huh?
 Oh, I see.
 You mean, time?
 I don't know -- starting after 4 years.
 No, I think you'll see --
 I think you'll see more minority candidates and women candidates coming forward.
 This is supposed to be the year of the women in the Senate.
Let's see how they do.
I hope a lot of --
 I have a fearless forecast.
A message just won't do it.
Colin Powell will be on somebody's ticket 4 years from now -- right?
Right?
He wanted that said -- 4 years.
 Now, if won't be, General Waller would be -- you say, why do you keep picking military people.
These are people that I just happen to know and have a high regard for.
I'm sure there are hundreds of others.
 How about Dr. Lou Sullivan?
 Absolutely.
 Yeah, a good man.
 Oh, oh.
 (Inaudible) totally agree.
My candidate's back there.
 Okay.
I can think of many.
 Absolutely.
 All right.
How about Sandra Day O'Connor as an example?
 Dr. Bernadine Healy --
 National Institutes of Health.
I'll yield the floor.
 All good Republicans.
 Name some more.
 May I ask for an exception because I think we owe Carole Simpson -- anybody who can stand in between these three characters here and get the job done -- we owe her a round of applause.
 I feel strongly about it because I don't want it to come out of my time.
 No, but let me just stay to the American people in 2 and a half weeks we're going to choose who should sit in this Oval Office, who to lead the economic recovery, who to be the leader of the free world, who to get the deficit down.
three ways to do that.
One is to raise taxes.
One is to reduce spending -- controlling that mandatory spending.
Another one is to invest and save and to stimulate growth.
I do not want to raise taxes.
I differ with the 2 here on that.
I'm just not going to do that.
 If the American people want to do it and not talk about it, then they ought to -- you know, I'm one person they ought to consider.
If they just want to keep slow dancing and talk about it and not do it, I'm not your man.
I am results oriented.
I am action oriented.
I've dealt my businesses.
Getting things done in three months that my competitors took 18 months to do.
 -- that ain't bad.
 But it's in your hands.
I wish you well.
I'll see you tomorrow night -- (Laughter) on NBC -- 10:30 to 11:00 Eastern Time.
 Thank you, Carole, and thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
 Thank you very much, Jim.
Let me first give you a sports update.
The Braves, one; the Cardinals, nothing, early on.
I want to thank you and I want to thank everybody here tonight.
I want to give a special thanks to my wife Elizabeth, my daughter Robin for their love and support, and thank the people who are listening and watching all over America.
In 20 days, you will help decide who will lead this country into the next century.
It's an awesome responsibility.
And you must ask yourself, do you know enough about the candidates?
You should know as much as possible about each of us.
Sometimes the views have been distorted.
There's been millions and millions of dollars of negative advertising spent distorting my views.
But I hope tonight you will get a better feel of who Bob Dole is and what he's all about.
And I think first you should -- I should understand that the question on your mind is do I understand your problem.
Would I understand it if it occurred to me, and I might just say I'm from a large family.
I got lots of relatives and they're good, average, middle-class, hardworking Americans.
They live all across the country.
They're not all Republicans.
Maybe all but one.
But in any event, I understand the problems.
Whether it's two parents working because one has to pay the taxes and one has to provide for the family, whether it's a single parent who just barely pays the pressing bills or whether you're worried about an education for your children going to the best schools, or whether you're worried about safe playgrounds, drug-free schools, crime-free schools.
This is what this election is all about.
And hopefully tonight when we conclude this debate you will have a better understanding and the viewing and listening audience will have a better understanding.
Thank you.
 I was going to applaud, too.
Well, thank you, Jim.
And thanks to the people of San Diego for giving us this opportunity to have another discussion about the decision we all face in front of people who will make the decision.
Again, I will say I will do my best to make this a discussion of ideas and issues, not insults.
What really matters is what happens to your future and what happens to our country as we stand on the brink of a new century, a time of extraordinary possibility.
I have a simple philosophy that I tried to follow for the last four years: Do what creates opportunity for all, what reinforces responsibility from all of us, and what will help us build a community where everybody's got a role to play and a place at the table.
Compared to four years ago, we're clearly better off.
We've got ten and a half million more jobs, the deficit's been reduced by 60 percent.
Incomes are rising for the first time in a decade, the crime rates, the welfare rolls are falling, we're putting , 100,000 more police on the street.
60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers have been denied handguns.
But that progress is only the beginning.
What we really should focus on tonight is what we still have to do to help the American people make the most of this future that's out there.
I think what really matters is what we can do to build strong families.
Strong families need a strong economy.
To me that means we have to go on and balance this budget while we protect Medicare and Medicaid and education and the environment.
We should give a tax cut, targeted to child rearing and education, to buying a first home and paying for health care.
We ought to help protect our kids from drugs and guns and gangs and tobacco.
We ought to help move a million people from welfare to work and we ought to create the finest education system in the world where every 18-year-old can go on to college and all of our younger children have great educational opportunities.
If we do those things, we can build that bridge to the 21st century.
That's what I hope to get to talk about tonight.
Thank you.
 Hi.
 Well, I would say first of all, I think, it's a very good question.
I appreciate the quote from the young man.
There's no doubt about it that many American people have lost their faith in government.
They see scandals almost on a daily basis.
They see ethical problems in the Whitehouse today.
They see 900 FBI files, private person, being gathered up by somebody in the Whitehouse.
Nobody knows who hired this man.
So there's a great deal of cynicism out there.
But I've always tried in whatever I've done is to bring people together.
I said in my acceptance speech in San Diego about two months ago that the exits are clearly marked.
If you think the Republican party is some place for you to come if you're narrow minded or bigoted or don't like certain people in America, the exits are clearly marked for you to walk out of as I stand here without compromise, because this is the party of Lincoln.
I think we have a real obligation, obviously public officials.
I'm no longer a public official.
I left public life on June the 11th of this year.
But it is very important.
Young people are looking to us.
They're looking to us for leadership.
They're watching what we do, what we say, what we promise and what we finally deliver.
And I would think, it seems to me that there are opportunities here.
When I'm President of the United States, I will keep my word.
My word is my bond.
 One of the reasons that I ran for president, Sandy, is because not just children, a lot of grownups felt that way.
And if you remember four years ago, we had not only rising unemployment, but a lot of rising cynicism.
I had never worked in Washington as an elected official.
It seemed to me that most of the arguments were partisan, Republican, Democrat, left, right, liberal, conservative.
That's why I said tonight I'm for opportunity, responsibility and community.
And we've gotten some real progress in the last four years.
I've also done everything I could at every moment of division in this country, after Oklahoma City, when these churches were burned, to bring people together and remind people that we are stronger because of our diversity.
We have to respect one another.
You mentioned Washington and Lincoln.
They were presidents at historic times.
This is an historic time.
It's important we go beyond those old partisan arguments and focus on people and their future.
When we do that, instead of shutting the government down over a partisan fight over the budget, we're a better country and that's why we're making progress now.
 Well, bringing people together, again, is obviously a responsibility we all have.
I know you do it.
Everybody here does it.
You do a lot of things nobody knows about.
I have a little foundation for the disabled called the Dole Foundation.
We've raised about $10 million.
We don't talk about it.
We try to help people with disabilities.
Bring them back into the mainstream of public life.
So it seems to me that there's also a public trust.
When you're the president of the United States, you have a public trust and you have to keep that public trust, as George Washington, as Abraham Lincoln did.
And I think now that trust is being violated and it seems to me we ought to face up to it, and the president ought to say tonight that he's not going to pardon anybody that he was involved in business with who might implicate him later on.
 I will.
First of all, let me say what we have done.
In the last four years we've worked hard to promote more competition to bring down the rate of inflation in health care costs without eroding health care quality.
The government pays for Medicare and Medicaid, as you know, and that's very important.
Secondly, we've added a million more children to the ranks of the insured through the Medicaid program.
We have protected 25 million people through the passage of the Kennedy-Kassebaum bill that says you can use your health insurance if you change jobs or someone in your family has been sick.
We just recently ended those drive-by deliveries saying people can't be kicked out of the hospital by insurance companies when they've just had babies.
So this is, that's a good start.
In the next four years, I want to focus on the following things.
Number one, add another million children to the insured ranks through the Medicaid program.
Number two, keep working with the states, as we are now, to add 2.2 million more people to the insurance system.
Number three, cover people who are between jobs for up to six months.
That could protect 3 million families, 700,000 kids.
Number four, make sure we protect the integrity with the Medicare program and Medicaid program and not do anything in cutting costs which would cause hundreds of hospitals to close which could have been the case if the 270billion dollar Medicare cut that I vetoed, had been enacted in the law.
 Well, first, let me say there you go again, Mr. President, talking about a Medicare cut.
I have heard you say this time after time.
I have heard you say on one TV appearance, "the media made me do it."
You were trying to defend your cut which was not a cut either, Reduction in the growth of spending.
We've always had at least 7 percent.
You've said publicly that it's now three times the rate of inflation.
We ought to cut the growth to twice the rate of inflation.
It's about where we are now.
So let's stop talking about cutting Medicare.
In my economic plan we increase it 39percent.
Don't forget what he tried to do with health care.
17 new taxes, spend 1.5 trillion dollars, 50 new bureaucracies.
Can you believe that?
You couldn't even have been a cardiologist because he had quotas.
You're a cardiologist, it wouldn't affect you.
But if somebody wanted to be a cardiologist, ten years from now, you'd have to be certain you complied with some of the rules in this extreme medical plan the government was going to take over for all Americans.
There are things we can do like the Kassebaum bill.
We changed many provisions I authored, cover preexisting conditions, portability, and there are other things we can do.
We still need to cover about 20million people and a lot of children.
 I don't have time in 30 seconds to respond to fix all that.
But let me just say the American Hospital Association said that the budget I vetoed could have closed 700 hospitals.
Not me.
On a per-person basis, it did cut way below the rate of inflation in medical costs.
But the important thing is what are we going to do now?
We need to help people who are between jobs.
We need to cover more kids.
Provide more preventative care.
My balanced budget covers mammograms for ladies, women on Medicare and also gives respite care to the million-plus families who have someone with Alzheimers.
These things are paid for in the balanced budget plan.
It'll move us forward.
 Jason, I appreciate that very much, being a former military man myself.
You know, we have 17,000 men and women today wearing our uniform that receive food stamps.
It shouldn't happen in America.
We have men and women wearing our uniform in substandard housing.
It shouldn't happen in America.
And it's time we take a look at the pay scales.
Did get a 3 percent increase this year, but that's not enough.
If we're going to ask young men and young women to protect us and defend us around the world, and we've had more deployments under this administration than any time in history.
Fifty times we deployed troops around the world.
Every time you do that you take a risk.
Somebody, you know, maybe your son, maybe your grandson, maybe somebody else.
But I think anybody who wears a uniform is a great American.
Remember Vietnam?
Remember when people almost used to walk across the street rather than have a contact with somebody who was in Vietnam?
That's all behind us now, and it should be behind us, and the forgotten war, the Korean War, but I guess I can just answer you very plainly, Jason.
Thank you for doing what you're doing.
America owes you a debt of gratitude.
 May I ask you a question?
What service are you in?
 And what kind of small business do you have?
 Good for you.
Let me say, if Senator Dole mentioned this, I just signed a bill that we got through Congress to increase the amount of pay increase we could give for military personnel and to make sure the pay increase this year was above the rate of inflation.
I also presented to the Congress and they adopted a large package of quality-of-life improvements, which are very important.
I spent a lot of time talking to military families as well as military members all over the world and in bases all across the United States, and I became convinced after talking to the families and the personnel in uniform that we needed to not only have the pay raise but we needed to invest more in child care, housing, and other things to support families, especially when there are longer deployments because of the downsizing of the military.
So I, we're going to do better, and we'll do better still, but this is a commitment I think that all Americans share without regard to party.
 I don't disagree with anything that the President said, except he waited four years to do these things, and my view is it ought to be, it will be done on Day 1.
We'll start working on Day 1 in the Dole- Kemp administration.
This is important.
We only have ten divisions now.
We used to have 18.
We had 25 fighter wings.
We're down to 13.
We had 536 ships.
We're down to 336 ships.
I mean, we've cut defense spending too much in the first place.
The President told you in '92 he would cut it 67 billion.
He cut 112 billion dollars, so we're right on the edge right now.
But the last thing we ought to do is make those who wear the uniforms sacrifice.
 Let me just take two seconds of my time because I'm the Commander-in-Chief to respond to one thing that was said.
I propose to spend 1.6 trillion dollars on defense between now and the year 2002 and there's less than 1 percent difference between my budget and the Republican budget on defense.
Now, on the Middle East, as you know, I worked very hard for peace in the Middle East.
The agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis was signed at the White House and the agreement -- the peace treaty with Jordan, I was -- I went to Jordan to sign that -- to be there.
But -- and I think the United States can do whatever we reasonably can.
I can say this: I do not believe Yassir Arafat wants us to send troops to the West Bank.
We have never been asked to send troops to the West Bank.
I saw the agreement that Prime Minister Rabin and Yassir Arafat signed on the West Bank.
It had 26 separate maps they had to sign, literally thousands of delineations of who would do what on the West Bank, and I believe if the parties will get together and in a good-faith manner make that agreement, that they'll be able to do it if we cannot impose a peace on the Middle East.
My position has always been that the job of the United States was to minimize the risks of peace.
You know, if they asked me to be part of some monitoring force -- as we are in the Sinai and have been since 1978 -- to monitor the peace between Egypt and Israel, frankly, I would have to think about it.
I would have to see what they wanted to do, but I don't believe that will be the request.
I think what Mr. Arafat wants us to do is to make sure that everybody honors the agreements they've already made.
That's why I brought the leaders to Washington a few days ago.
I think they will, and I think we'll get there.
Don't be too discouraged.
 Let me, Jason, come back to you a minute because there is a big difference in the defense budget.
We had 7 billion this year and 10 billion more than the president.
He puts his money in the outyears, and even if he were re-elected, he'd be gone before anything would happen, and nothing is going to happen.
We don't have modernization now.
If we don't build more B-2 bombers in California and we lost about 500,000 jobs out in California, because of this devastation, these big, big cuts.
We had to make cuts.
We didn't have the cuts the president promised he'd make and then he doubled.
I think we need to go back and take a look.
We're increasing defense reasonably -- not too much, but we are increasing defense some -- because we want to be prepared in case somebody here gets called up, Jason.
I would say I didn't hear what Yassir Arafat had to say, but I don't want to -- you know, I think foreign policy, I want to be very careful about, and I'm not here to argue about the President with some ongoing foreign policy matter.
What I want the President to do, and I think he may have done it, his last statement, call for an unconditional end of the violence and have the parties keep on talking as they should talk and have a resolution.
The last thing we want to do is commit more forces anywhere.
But let's sort of keep this out of politics because it's pretty dicey right now.
 When the change of government occurred in Israel, the people of Israel were saying we don't want to abandon the peace process.
We want more security.
Then a lot of mutual distrust developed.
A lot of things happened which maybe shouldn't have happened.
When I asked Yassir Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu to come to Washington and got them together and they talked alone for three hours, I was convinced that they had to have a chance to make that peace.
Again, I'd say if they asked us to play some reasonable role, I don't know how I would respond.
It would depend entirely on what they asked us to do, but the real secret there is for them to abide by the agreements they've made and find a way to trust each other, and they're going to have to spend some time and trust each other.
Prime Minister Rabin gave his life believing that that trust could be materialized, and I still think it can be.
 Oh, that's very easy.
My record going back to 1965 in the Congress, the first vote we had was whether or not you should put a little notice on cigarettes.
They may be danger -- I voted I for everything since that time.
In fact, 1992 we had a bill come before us that all the states had to comply or they're going to lose certain money.
We sent it to the Clinton Administration for implementation, and they waited three and a half years.
And during that period about 3,000 young kids every day started smoking.
So you add it up.
That's about three million.
Not until again in 1996 -- I don't want anybody to smoke.
My brother probably died partly because of cigarettes.
I was asked a technical question.
Are they addictive?
Maybe they -- they probably are addictive.
I don't know.
I'm not a doctor.
You shouldn't smoke.
You ought to be glad you quit, Oscar, 30 years.
And it seems to me what we need to do is to talk about not only tobacco but drugs, because drug use between 12- and 17-year-olds has doubled in this administration in the last 44 months.
Marijuana use is up 141percent.
Cocaine use up 160 percent.
They're your kids.
It's all happening in this administration because they cut funding and they cut interdiction.
When I'm President of the United States, we're going to use the National Guard and whatever sources we need to stop some of the drugs coming into America.
If you stop the drugs, nobody is going to use the drugs; so don't smoke, don't drink, don't use drugs.
Just don't do it.
 Oscar, the question of what the federal government should do to limit the access of tobacco to young people is one of the biggest differences between Senator Dole and me.
We did propose a regulation six months after I became President under the law he mentioned.
It simply says all these states -- it made it illegal for kids to smoke.
Now they have to try harder if they want to keep getting federal funds.
Then we took comments, as we always do, and there were tens of thousands of comments as to how we ought to do it.
That's what drug it out.
Meanwhile, we started the -- also in '93 to look into whether cigarettes were addictive enough for the Federal Food and Drug Administration to ban the ability of cigarette companies to advertise, market and distribute their products to our kids.
No president had ever taken on the tobacco lobby before.
I did.
Senator Dole opposed me.
He went down and made a speech to people who were on his side saying that I did the wrong thing.
I think I did the right thing.
On drugs, I have repeatedly said drugs are wrong and illegal and can kill you.
We have strengthened enforcement, and everybody in San Diego knows we strengthened control of the border.
We have done a lot more, and I hope we get a chance to talk about it.
 Well, they also know if they live in San Diego, Mr. President, if you're caught with 125 pounds of marijuana or less, you go back to Mexico.
You're not prosecuted.
You have a U.S. attorney here that sends `em back home, so I think that's pretty important.
That's a lot of marijuana.
That's a big supply.
But don't get into this smoke screen here Oscar.
The President in the election year decided I ought to do something, I haven't done anything on drugs.
I've been AWOL for 44 months, so let's take on smoking, see they haven't even done it.
They haven't said what's going to happen, whether they're going to have it declared addictive.
Once it's a drug, does it apply only to teenagers or everybody in America?
Nobody should smoke, young or old, but particularly young people should not smoke, but my record is there.
It's been there.
I've voted eight, ten times since 1965.
 First of all, there are two different things.
Social Security and Medicare are entirely different in terms of the financial stabilities.
Let's talk about them separately.
Social Security is stable until, as you pointed out, at least the third decade of the next century.
But we'd like to have a Social Security fund that has about 70 years of life instead of about 30 years of life.
What we have to do is simply to make some adjustments to take account of the fact that the baby boomers, people like me, are bigger in number than the people that went just before us and the people that come just after us.
And I think what we'll plainly do is what we did in 1983 when Senator Dole served, and this is something I think he did a good job on when he served on the Social Security commission and they made some modest changes in Social Security to make sure that it would be alive and well into the 21st century.
And we will do that.
It's obvious that there are certain things that have to be done and there are 50 or 60 different options, and a bipartisan commission to take it out of politics, will make recommendations and build support for the people.
Medicare is different.
Medicare needs help now.
I have proposed a budget which would put ten years on the life of the Medicare trust fund.
That's more than it's had a lot of the time in the last years.
It would save a lot of money through more managed care, by giving more options, more preventative care and lowering the inflation rate and the prices we're paying providers without having the kind of big premium increases and out-of-pocket costs that the budget I vetoed would provide.
Then that would give us ten years to do with Medicare what we're going to do with Social Security; have a bipartisan group look at what we have to do to save it when the baby boomers retire.
But now we can, we ought to pass this budget now and put ten years on it right away so no one has to worry about it.
 Well again, if you're somebody thinking about the future, I think it's fair to say that it'll be -- we'll work it out.
This is a political year, and the President is playing politics with Medicare.
After this year is over, we'll resolve it just as we did with Social Security in `83.
It's a nonpartisan commission.
Ronald Reagan got together with Tip O'Neill and Howard Baker, two Republicans and one Democrat.
They appointed a commission I was on that commission.
We resolved, we rescued Social Security.
We suggested -- I think it has been over a year ago now -- we do the same with Medicare, and the White House called it a gimmick.
Now last week I guess it was Donna Shalala said well we'll cut Medicare a hundred billion and appoint a commission.
It will probably have to be done by a commission.
Take it out of politics.
I think if I were a senior citizen I would be a little fed up with all these ads scaring seniors, scaring veterans and scaring students about education.
When you don't have any ideas, you don't have any agenda, and all you have is fear, that's all you can use.
We have ideas in the Dole-Kemp campaign and we will rescue Medicare as we did Social Security.
 Their idea was to have the poorest seniors in the country pay $270 more this year.
Their idea was a budget that the that the American Hospital Association said could close 700 hospitals.
Their idea was to charge everybody more out-of-pocket costs in their budget that I vetoed.
Not in an election year, sir.
I told them in early '95.
Senator Dole said 30 years ago he was one of 12 people who voted against Medicare and he was proud of it.
A year ago he said, "I was right then.
I knew it wouldn't work."
American seniors have the highest life expectancy in the world.
We need to reform it.
Not wreck it.
 Well, we've taken the first step.
Took it three steps, twice we sent welfare reform to the president and he vetoed it.
On the third time we sent welfare reform to the president he signed it but announced he would change it next year, and the vice president said they were going to do something else through the line item veto which I've never understood, but that's sort of inside baseball.
What we need to do is make certain we try to return people to work.
And I'm standing here as someone who, a long time ago as the county attorney in Russell, Kansas, one of our jobs every month was go through all the welfare checks and sign them.
And three of those checks were my grandparents'.
So I know what it's like to have to look welfare head-on.
Obviously some people are going to need help.
This is the United States of America.
You're not going to go without food and you're not going to go without medical care.
This is America.
But at the same time, if you want to get off Medicare, get back in the mainstream, we're going to provide jobs.
We're going to say you have a five-year limit.
You can be on welfare.
You got two years to look for a job.
We provided more money for daycare in the bill that passed the senate, was vetoed, then it came back and the president signed pretty much the same bill.
But this is an important issue.
I don't think we ought to be giving welfare payments to illegal immigrants.
It puts a heavy burden on a state like -- except for emergencies.
It puts a heavy burden on a states like California.
It costs California taxpayers 3 billion dollars a year.
 Let me get out of your way here.
 It's illegal right now and has been for years for illegal immigrants to get welfare benefits.
Let me say that this is one of the most important issues in the world to me.
I started working on welfare reform in 1980 because I was sick of seeing people trapped in a system that was increasingly isolating them and making their kids more vulnerable to get in trouble.
So I've been working on it when I was a governor for a long time.
When I became president I used the authority I had in this law to get out from certain federal rules to help states move people to work.
We reduced the welfare rolls by 2 million already.
Now, I've got a plan with this new welfare reform law to work with the private sector, to give employees specific tax incentives to hire people off welfare, and to do some other things which will create more jobs in the private sector, at least a million, and move more people from welfare to work.
It's very important.
And I hope we get a chance to talk about this more.
There's not a more important issue.
I, I still remember a woman that I met ten years ago who said she wanted to get off welfare so her kids could tell, give an answer when they say, "What does your mother do for a job?"
I met that woman again.
She's got four kids.
One's got a good job, one's studying to be a doctor.
One's in technical school, one's an honor student in high school.
I want to make more people like that woman, Lily Harden, so I've got a plan to do it, and it's just beginning.
 Well another thing we can do.
We talk about growth.
We've got a great economic package which I hope we will discuss later.
Across-the-board tax cut.
Child credits.
$500 per child under 18.
Reduce the capital gains rate.
Create more jobs and opportunities for people on and off welfare.
We have other provisions.
Less litigation.
The trial lawyers, big supporters of the president.
The trial lawyers, of course they like lawsuits, so every time they have a bill that they want vetoed, the president vetoes it for them.
We've got to understand in America that we've got to have growth, create more jobs and more opportunities in the private sector.
The president takes credit for all these people off welfare.
The governors did that.
Federal government doesn't do that.
And the government doesn't create jobs.
They're created in the private sector.
 First of all, we have a big plan to reduce the capital gains tax when people sell their homes.
Part of my tax package which is paid for in my balanced budget plan would exempt up to half a million dollars in gains from people when they sell their homes, which I think is the biggest capital gains benefit we could give to most ordinary Americans.
We also have capital gains now for people that invest in new small businesses and hold the investment for five years.
It was part of our other economic plan.
And these are things I think that will go a long way toward helping America build a stronger economy and a better tax system.
I think the most important thing to emphasize, though, is that we also have to help people in other ways to build a strong economy and we can't have any tax cut that's not paid for.
One of the big differences between Senator Dole and myself is that I told you how I'm going to pay for every penny of the tax cuts I recommend and we've worked hard to bring this deficit down and that's helped people in the real estate business because the interest rates are lower.
We've got home ownership at a 15-year high.
We've got this country going in the right direction.
So we can have a tax cut but my priority would be to help the families who need it with child rearing and education and buying a first-time home and helping for health care costs.
So from your business, helping in buying a first-time home, exempting the capital gains on the sale of the home would be the most important things that you asked about.
Thank you, Pamela.
 Pam, what the president didn't tell you is all his tax cuts expire the year 2000, but these increases go on forever.
That's the liberal approach.
You know, give you a little tax cut, give you a couple of years, then make the tax increases go on forever.
So the net tax increase in his plan's somewhere between 60 and 80 billion dollars.
We have in the Dole-Kemp economic plan, unless unless your home's worth over 500,000 dollars.
And if it is, I appreciate it congratulate you.
But in any event, no tax.
It's a good idea, they saw it, they picked it up and put it in theirs, but it's only temporary.
Ours are permanent, ours is a good plan.
Create jobs and opportunities.
Capital gains rate, cut it in half, cut it 28 percent to 14 percent.
There are 7 trillion dollars in assets locked up in America.
If we cut the capital gains rate, I'm told everyday, I had a letter from a former constituent in Kansas saying I want to sell property in California, put it in my business in Kansas, I can't, because the capital gains rate's too high.
We need to get the economy going.
That'll help social security.
That'll create more jobs.
That'll help people who want to get off welfare.
It's the American way.
 Before Senator Dole left the Senate, he and Mr. Gingrich also were recommending that we pass these tax cuts only insofar as we could pay for them.
We all assume that the tax cuts will be permanent.
But we have to prove we can pay for them.
After he left the senate, we abandoned that.
That's why most experts say that this tax scheme will blow a huge hole in the deficit, raise interest rates and weaken the economy and that will take away all the benefits of the tax cut with a weaker economy.
That's why we have to balance the budget, and I will tell you how I'm going to pay for anything I promise you, line by line.
You should expect that from both of us.
 Well, I think age is very -- you know, wisdom comes from age, experience and intelligence.
And if you have some of each -- and I have some age, some experience and some intelligence -- that adds up to wisdom.
I think it also is a strength.
It's an advantage.
And I have a lot of young people work in my office, work in my campaign.
This is about America.
This is about, somebody said earlier, one of the first questions, we're together.
It's one America, one nation.
I'm looking at our economic plan because I'm concerned about the future for young people.
I'm looking about drugs.
The president has been AWOL for four years.
I'm looking about crime.
He'll claim credit now for crime going down, but it happens because mayors and governors and others have brought crime down.
Rudy Giuliani, Mayor of New York, brought crime down 25 percent just in New York City.
Of course the president will take credit for that.
My view is we want to find jobs and opportunities and education.
This year the Republican Congress, as far as student loans went from 24 billion to 36 billion over the next six years.
A 50 percent increase.
The highest appropriation.
6 billion dollars for Pell Grants, very, very important.
We also raised the amount of each Pell Grant.
In our economic plan, the $500 child credit can be used for young people, rolled over and over and over, you, of course not this age, but if you have a child two years old, 7 percent interest would be worth about $18,000 by the time that child was ready for college.
 I can only tell you that I don't think Senator Dole is too old to be president.
It's the age of his ideas that I question.
You're almost not old enough to remember this.
But we tried this before, promising people an election year tax cut that's not paid for.
 You tried it last time you ran.
 Tell him you can have everything you got.
And so let me just say this.
Did you hear him say that Congress just voted to increase student loans and scholarships?
They did after he left.
The last budget he led cut Pell Grants, cut student loans.
I vetoed it when they shut the government down.
My plan would give students a dollar-for-dollar reduction for the cost of a typical community college tuition.
A $10,000 deduction a year for the cost of college tuition.
We let families save in an IRA, withdraw tax free to pay for the cost of education and it's all paid for.
My whole administration is about your future.
It's about what the 21st century is going to be like for you.
I hope you will look at the ideas in it.
Thank you.
 When you don't have any ideas, I guess you say the other person's ideas are old.
As I said earlier, they don't have any ideas.
Their ideas is to raise taxes and spend more money.
That's the liberal philosophy.
That's what you like, you've got a perfect candidate.
President Clinton came to California in 1992.
He said the centerpiece in my first four years is going to be a middle class tax cut.
Now all you got that tax cut, congratulations.
Because you got a big tax increase.
You got a 265 billion dollar tax increase.
And he stands here and says politicians who make promises like that ought to be ignored.
Well he made the promise.
I keep my word, and you will have a tax cut.
It will help you in whatever you're going to do in the next few years.
Thank you.
 No, ma'am, I don't.
I am against quotas.
I'm against giving anybody any kind of preference for something they're not qualified for.
But because I still believe that there is some discrimination and that not everybody has an opportunity to prove they're qualified, I favor the right kind of Affirmative Action.
I've done more to eliminate Affirmative Action programs I didn't think were fair and tighten others up than my predecessors have, since affirmative action's been around.
But I have also worked hard to give people a chance to prove that they are qualified.
Let me just give you some examples.
We've doubled the number of loans from the small business administration, tripled the number of loans to women business people, no one unqualified, everybody had to meet the standards.
We've opened 260,000 new jobs in the military to women since I've been president.
But the joint chiefs say we're stronger and more confident and solid than ever.
Let me give you another example of what I mean.
To me, Affirmative Action is making that extra effort.
It's sort of like what Senator Dole did when he sponsored the Americans with Disabilities Act and said to certain stores, okay, you have to make it accessible to people in wheelchairs.
We weren't guaranteeing anything, anybody anything except the chance to prove they were qualified, the chance to prove that they could do it.
And that's why I must say I agree with General Colin Powell that we're not there yet.
We ought to keep making those extra effort Affirmative Action programs, the law and the policy of the land.
 Well, we may not be there yet but we're not going to get there by giving preferences and quotas.
I supported that route for some time and again I think it gets back to experience.
A little experience, a little age, a little intelligence.
And I noted that nobody was really benefitting except a very small group at the top.
The average person wasn't benefitting.
People who had the money were benefiting.
People who got all the jobs were benefiting.
It seems to me that we ought to support the California civil rights initiative.
It ought to be not based on gender or ethnicity or color.
Or disability.
I'm disabled.
I shouldn't have a preference.
I would like to have one in this race, come to think of it, but I don't get one.
Maybe we can work that out.
I get a 10-point spot.
This is America.
No discrimination.
Discrimination ought to be punished but there ought to be equal opportunity.
We ought to reach out, make certain everybody has a chance to participate.
Equal opportunity.
But we cannot guarantee equal results in America.
That's not how America became the greatest country on the face of the earth.
 I have never supported quotas.
I've always been against them.
I don't favor equal results, but I do favor making sure everybody has a chance to prove they're competent.
The reason I have opposed that initiative is because I'm afraid it will end those extra effort programs.
Again I say, think of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Make an effort to put a ramp up there so someone in a wheelchair can get up.
You don't guarantee they get the job.
You guarantee they have a chance to prove they're competent.
And as I said, this is not a partisan thing with me.
General Colin Powell said the same thing, he fears the initiative would take away the extra effort programs.
No preferences to unqualified people, no quotas, but don't give up on making an extra effort until you're sure everybody has a chance to prove they're qualified.
 Well I'm glad you asked.
What's your first name?
 I first want to say the President didn't quite give you all of the stuff on the quotas, because the Justice Department had what we called the Piscataway case up in New Jersey.
It's pretty clear that was a quota case, and just because one teacher was white and one black and they had the same qualifications, you know they decided who would stay there.
It shouldn't be that way.
Now, the President can say well he wants to mend it, not end it.
There are 168 federal programs that allow quotas.
He ended one.
Now, this economic package, Tim, I'm glad you asked, because you look like the type that might be able to benefit from a 15 percent across- the-board tax cut and $500-per-child tax credit, or -- you know, estate tax relief which you're not interested in right now, but capital gains rate reduction.
If you're taking care of an elderly parent, you get a $1,000 deduction.
We think that's very important because a lot of people take care of their parents.
How do we pay for it?
You can have a constitutional amendment to balance the budget, which the President opposed and defeated.
He twisted arms and got six Democrats to vote with him and lost by one vote.
We're going to balance the budget, by the year 2002.
The President wants to spend 20 percent more in the next six years, and I want to spend 14 percent more and give that 6 percent back to the people.
Remember, it's your money; it's not his money.
And it's not my money.
It's your money.
And you shouldn't have to apologize for wanting to keep all you can of it.
But he ought to apologize for wanting to take more and more.
He wants to give you sort of a government tax cut, which really doesn't mean anything.
 You know, one of the responsibilities of growing older, it seems to me, is being able to tell people something they may not want to hear just because it's true.
When they had a 250 billion dollar tax scheme, that is half the size of this one.
This one is 550.
They passed the budget.
They have 270 billion dollars in Medicare cuts the first education cuts in history, cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent, took away the guarantee of quality standards in nursing homes, took away the guarantee of health care for folks with disabilities.
Don't take my word for this.
The Economist magazine polled lots of economists, seven Nobel prize winners who said if this tax scheme passes, it will require huge cuts, 40 percent, in the environment and law enforcement and education.
It will require bigger cuts in Medicare than I vetoed last time.
My targeted tax cut is for child-rearing, buying a first-time home, paying for health care costs.
And it's paid for, and I'll tell you how I'll pay for it.
He won't tell you because he can't.
 Your targeted tax cut, Mr. President, never hits anybody.
That's the problem with it.
Nobody ever gets it.
But I must say I'm a little offended by this word "scheme."
You talked about it last time, you talked about a risky scheme and Vice President Gore repeated it about ten times in St. Petersburg.
If I have anything in politics, it's my word.
My colleagues, Democrats and Republicans, will tell you that Bob Dole kept his word.
I'm going to keep my word to you.
I'm going to keep my word to the American people.
We're going to tax -- cut taxes and balance the budget.
We're not going to touch Medicare.
It's going to grow 39 percent, and Social Security is going to grow 34 percent.
The President doesn't have any ideas so he's out trashing ours.
This isn't going to blow a hole in the deficit.
He promised you a tax cut in 1992, and if you got one, you ought to vote for him.
 Thank you, well, first let me say that I signed the Family Leave Act.
It was my very first bill, and I'm very proud of it because it symbolizes what I think we ought to be doing.
I don't take credit for all the good things that have happened in America, but I take credit for what I've tried to do to work with others to make good things happen.
Most important good things that happen in America happen in families.
Just about every family I know, the main concern is how am I going to succeed at work and still do right by my children.
Family medical leave has let 12 million families take a little time off for the birth of a child or a family illness without losing their job.
I'd like to see it expanded in two ways.
I'd like to say you can also take a little time off without losing your job to go to a regular parent-teacher conference or to go to a regular doctor's appointment with a family member.
I'd also like to see the overtime laws change so that we could have some more flex time so that at the discretion of the worker, the worker, if you earn overtime, you could decide when you want that time to be taken, in cash or in time with your family if you've got a family problem.
I never go anywhere, it seems like, where I don't meet somebody who has benefited from a Family Leave Law.
In Longview, Texas the other day, I met a woman who was almost in tears because she had been able to keep her job while spending time with her husband who had cancer.
One of the people who's here with me today met a woman in the airport saying her son, Jess was able to be present at the birth of her child because of the Family Leave Law.
So yes, I think it should be expanded.
We have to help people succeed at home and at work.
 Well, 88 percent of the people -- the President claims 11 million are already covered and only 5 percent -- keep in mind only 5 percent of the employers are affected by the Family Leave Act.
We had a better idea.
We didn't win.
We had a better idea.
Now we have a majority and we get a president.
That was a tax credit for the employer.
Instead of the federal government, we had that tax credit, pick up some of the costs, because if you have to hire a replacement worker, that's a cost.
This is the way it ought to work, give more power back to the states and back to the people back to the taxpayers, not always the long arm of the federal government.
But keep in mind this bill covers 5 percent of the employers, and 95 percent of the employers and all those employees they employ are not covered in this act.
And according to Investors Daily, which I read just a couple of days ago, 88 percent of the people he claims credit for are already covered in collective bargaining agreements or other agreements.
We had family leave in our office, I'm certain.
I see my friend Senator Mitchell.
He had family leave.
I work every day with people.
I spend a lot of time in hospitals.
I know what it's like to be in a hospital.
Sure we want family leave.
But there's a better way to do it.
 I only have 30 seconds.
I can't fix the statistics.
It covers the majority of the work force.
Employers of under 50 are exempted.
The bill originally covered employers of 25 and more, but because of opposition, we went up to 50.
Senator Dole led the opposition to it.
He filibustered it.
He said it was a mistake.
He said it would hurt the economy.
We've had record numbers of new small businesses and 10 and a half million jobs.
It didn't hurt the economy.
He still believes it's a mistake.
I believe it's right.
You can decide which of us you think are right.
It's up to you.
 Well, right.
We've lost 357,000 manufacturing jobs.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics today said they made a mistake.
It's probably going to take a much, much higher figure.
So we talk about all these new jobs.
We'd better wait and see what the results are.
We're going to do that with a more aggressive trade policy.
We're going to do that with an economic package.
We're going to do that with regulatory reform.
You know, regulations cost the average family right here, Democrat or Republican, about $7,000 a year.
7,000.
That's like a tax.
It's put a lot of people out of business.
I met a lady in Colorado Springs about seven weeks ago now.
She had a small business with 63 employees.
She finally gave it up.
Why?
Because of paperwork and regulation.
Congress passed a paperwork reduction act.
The President exempts the IRS which creates three-fourths of the paperwork.
We're going to have regulatory -- we're gonna have litigation reform.
You know, I fell off a platform out in California, Chico, a while back.
Before I hit the ground, my cell phone rang and this trial lawyer said, I think we've got a case here.
(Laughter).
We've got to stop some of these frivolous lawsuits.
They're putting people out of business, men and women.
Get the economy going, cut the capital gains rate, create more jobs and opportunities for everybody in America.
That's what we will do.
And my word is good.
I keep my promises.
I don't break my promises after the election, and I don't make new promises in an election year.
We're going to get it done.
We're going to grow some of these jobs in America, because we need to get it -- they're going the wrong way.
 Let's look at the facts.
We lost a lot of manufacturing jobs in the 12 years before I became President.
We've gained manufacturing jobs since I've been President.
We've negotiated over 200 separate trade agreements.
Let's just take California.
In California, we made 37 billion dollars' worth of telecommunications equipment eligible for export for the first time.
We're selling everything from from -- from telephones to CDs to rice in Japan.
We're selling American automobiles in Japan now.
I visited a Chrysler dealership in Japan.
We're No.1 in automobile manufacturing production and sales around the world again, the first time since 1970s.
Why?
Because we've had tough aggressive trade policies, and because we've got interest rates down.
We have a good, stable economic policy.
Because we reduced the deficit four years in a row.
For the first time in the 20th century the President has done that in all four years and that's why I don't want to see us blow a big hole in the deficit with a tax program we can't pay for, so your interest rates will go up, and you'll have to pay back in higher interest rates what you allegedly will get in a tax cut, so I say keep working on expanding the markets.
More than half of these 10 and a half million new jobs are in higher wage areas and we'll have more manufacturing and sales around the world.
 You may think the biggest employer in America is General Motors, but I've got news for you.
It's Manpower Services.
Hiring people temporarily who have lost their jobs and they get to work for 30 days or 60 days.
That's a good economy?
I don't think so.
They're setting new records this year.
We had the worst economy in a century.
We had the slowest growth, about 2.5 percent.
The president inherited growth of over 5 percent.
We don't have the S&L crisis anymore.
Republicans have cut 53 billion dollars in spending, that's why the budget looked good.
It didn't look good the first two years when we had a Democratic president and  Democratic Congress.
 I'm for it.
That's my policy.
I'm for it.
I believe that any law- abiding, tax-paying citizen who shows up in the morning and doesn't break the law and doesn't interfere with his or her neighbors ought to have the ability to work in our country and shouldn't be subject to unfair discrimination.
I'm for it.
Now, I have a little time left so let me just say that I get attacked so many times on these questions; it's hard to answer these things.
Senator Dole just said we had the worst economy in the century.
In February he said we had the best economy in  30 years, just February.
And I don't want to respond in kind to all these things.
I could.
I could answer a lot of these things tit for tat.
But I hope we can talk about what we're going to do in the future.
No attack ever created a job or educated a child, or helped a family make ends meet.
No insult ever cleaned up a toxic waste dump or helped an elderly person.
Now, for four years that's what I worked on.
If you give me four years more I will work on it some more and I will try to answer these charges, but I prefer to emphasize direct answers to the future and I gave you a direct answer.
 Well, I'm opposed to discrimination in any form but I don't favor creating special rights for any group.
That would be my answer to this question.
And I'm, you know -- there would be special rights for different groups in America.
But I'm totally opposed to discrimination.
I don't have any policy against hiring anyone; whether it's lifestyle or whatever, we don't have any policy of that kind, never have had in my office or will we have in the future.
But as far as special rights, I'm opposed to same-sex marriages, which the President signed well after midnight one morning in the dark of night.
I opposed it.
But I will get back to the economic package because, again, I think this is very important.
If there's anything that's going to change America it's get the economy growing.
The President inherited a good economy, sure the S&L crisis then were selling assets.
Got a Republican Congress cutting spending finally and he said it's the best four years ever.
That's not true.
We had a 1.2 million bankruptcy, set a new record.
Credit card debt has never been higher.
I just told you about this manufacturing job loss which is going to increase.
We need a good strong economic package, let the private sector creates the jobs and they can do it.
 If you believe that the California economy was better in 1992 than it is today, you should vote for Bob Dole.
I have worked so hard out here to help turn this economy around.
Let me just give you one tiny example.
In San Diego where we had some defense cutbacks, we funded a project for the University of California San Diego to use airplane composite materials to build lighter, stronger bridges, a little project in a program that Senator Dole opposed.
And that composite now is going to be built around the bridges on the Santa Monica Freeway to help minimize the impact of earthquakes and create more jobs.
That's just one tiny example.
Maybe we will talk about some more before it's over.
 Thank you.
 Well, one thing I did was oppose the government takeover health care that President Clinton offered in 1993, which created 17 new taxes and 50 new bureaucracies and price controls, because we were afraid the very thing you mentioned would have happened.
Everybody would have been forced into managed care.
You couldn't have chosen your own doctor and that would have been the end.
And I think right now we got to go back.
I know they've appointed a commission to take a look at managed care.
Maybe that's part of the answer.
But it seems to me if we start to take choices away from people and if we drive them into one type care, eliminate fee-for-service altogether or eliminate the fact you can go to your own doctor, you have to go somewhere else, then I think we've taken a giant step backward in the United States of America.
We have the best health care delivery system in the world and we want to keep it that way.
That's why we opposed the government take over health care plan that President Clinton tried and tried and tried to get through Congress.
Didn't get it done.
And ended up we had more votes than he had, then they decided to pull the plug.
It was a big, big mistake.
Now whether or not he'll do that again I've heard some of the people say, well, that's the model we ought to use and if he's reelected maybe he will come back and try it again.
I hope not.
I hope not in both cases.
But it does seem to me that you've raised a very important point that needs to be addressed.
You're going to have to watch it.
Gonna have to take a look at all the managed care going on in California, or we're going to end up losing our best care that we have in the world.
 I'm just curious.
How many of you are under managed care plans?
Raise your hand if you're in managed care plan.
How many of you like it?
 Two.
 Well, one of the things that I tried to do was to make sure that everybody in the country who was under a managed care plan should at least have three choices of plans, and would have the right to get out without penalty every year.
Now that's not a government takeover.
That's like the family of medical-leave law; it just tries to set the rules of the game.
I'm strongly in favor of a federal bill to repeal any gag rules on providers.
In other words, I believe that doctors should not be able to be kicked out of managed care plans just because they tell the patients what they need and what more expensive care options might be.
If we're saving money and managing resources better, that's a good thing.
If we're saving money and depriving people of care, that's a bad thing.
A good place to start is to say no managed care provider can gag a doctor and kick the doctor out of the managed care plan for the doctor, telling the patient, you need a more expensive test, you need a more expensive procedure, your health requires it.
 Well, I don't have any quarrel with that.
I think that would help.
But I think what we want to avoid is falling back into this nationalized health care system that President Clinton wanted to give us in 1993.
If that isn't a liberal idea, I've never heard one.
17 new taxes, price controls, 50 new bureaucracies.
We'd have that trouble all over America.
We need to deal with managed care.
It not only happened in California.
It's happening in other states that we visit, too.
It's a national problem.
Not just a state problem.
 First of all, I think it's important to make voting more accessible.
That's why I strongly supported the Motor Voter law.
There was a big story I think in U.S.A. Today of the millions of people who have now registered because of it.
Secondly, I think we need to look at making the elections more accessible.
You know several states now are letting people vote over three weeks.
A lot of people are busy and it's hard for them to just get there and vote.
Third thing I think we need is more forums like this, which is one of the reasons I have so strongly supported campaign finance reform.
Because if you want to cut the cost of campaigns, you have to open the airways, because what drives the cost of campaigns are the cost of advertising on television, radio, newspaper, mass mailing.
And if you open the airways to more things like this, you see it's not just you that are participating here.
For every one of you who stood up here and asked a question tonight, I promise you there's a 100,000 Americans who said I wish I could have asked that question.
So I think we have to change the nature of politics.
The last thing I think we should do is something I have been trying to do since I have been president, is every time I do something in a public way, I try to have a real American citizen there who is directly affected by it so that people can see the connection of what happens way across the country, in Washington with more police on the street, in San Diego, clean up the sewage here in San Diego, doubling the border guards here in Southern California, that there is a connection between what we do way back there and what we do here.
Those are my best ideas about it.
 Well, I don't know of any perfect solution.
I have been in politics for some time, and I worry about the people who don't vote.
And I wonder if it's our fault, the candidates' fault.
People say, "I don't care.
One vote doesn't make a difference."
I can give you hundreds of -- you can probably give me 200 cases where one vote made a difference.
I know it made a lot of difference many times in the Congress.
Campaign finance might help.
It might help the contributions from coming in from Indonesia or other foreign countries, rich people in those countries, and then being sent back after the L.A. Times discovers it, $250,000.
But maybe there ought to be more debates.
I would be willing to have another debate this year.
We can invite all the candidates.
And talk about the economy.
If we don't get the economy to grow, if we don't cut taxes, and give people child credits, and cut the capital gains rate, and get this economy growing, we're going to limp into the next century.
If we grow the economy it's going to help Social Security.
It's going to help jobs.
It's going to help everything.
 Let me make one other suggestion, because you're a teacher, you can have an impact on that.
One of the things I think that really frustrates people is that so often political campaigns seem to be more about the politicians that are running than the people.
And there is a connection.
And I think what we have to do is convince people there is a big difference, if you vote one way you will have a Department of Education in the 21st century, if you vote the other way, you won't.
If you vote one way you will have an expansion of family leave.
If you vote the other way, you will be lucky to save it.
But these are important questions.
And people have to decide.
I think that the American people also need to be a little more responsible and think about whether there's a connection with their lives and what we do in Washington.
 Iris.
 Well, we have in our economic pack, -- individual retirement accounts where we think it will encourage savings.
You can also use those accounts for health care or education or a first home.
We're doing that precisely, and I think one thing sooner or later we're going to have to consider is take a look at the Social Security system.
Because we've got a lot of people advocating we don't want to put our money into Social Security.
You have to be very careful of that because you have to protect the people who are already in the pipeline.
It's something you might consider.
I'm not suggesting it will be done, but at least we ought to look at it.
It's been looked, When I was chairman of the finance committee which handled Social Security we looked at all these options, and one thing we've got to make certain, when I used to go home my mother would tell me all I've got is my Social Security, don't touch it.
And we didn't touch it.
We preserved it.
And I'm an optimist.
Your your Social Security is going to be there when you retire.
We will fix it.
It will probably happen in the year 2012 or 2015.
In 1983 we thought we had a 75 -year fix.
It didn't work.
Much, much less, but at least we fixed it for some time and 37 to 40 million people get their checks on time.
So we need to preserve the system.
And we need to make it stronger.
But we also need to look at some options, whether or not we -- depending on what the options are.
In fact, they have got a commission right now in Congress, a bipartisan commission, looking at all the different options they will present to the next Congress.
so I think we will wait, see what they present, take a look at it.
 Iris, this is one where we have some agreement, I think.
Only about half the people in this country have pension plans.
And Social Security is not enough for a lot of people to live on, or at least is not enough for them to maintain anything like their previous lifestyle.
So we've got to figure out how are we going to have more people with pension plans, and pension coverage has been declining as more and more people work for small businesses and fewer people work for big businesses.
So what, what is in my plan and I think it's almost identical in Senator Dole's plans is we make more people eligible to save in an IRA and let couples, married couples save more and then they could withdraw from it tax-free if they needed to, for medical emergencies or buy a home or education, but they could also save to supplement retirement.
In addition to that, we just passed a sweeping small business reform that makes it easier for small business people to take out 401 K plans for themselves and employees and much easier for employees to carry it from job to job.
My best friend from grade school is a computer software salesman and he told me last time he changed employers it took him nine months to figure out how to transfer his 401K plan.
Now none of that will happen anymore.
I hope over the next ten years you will see a big increase over the percentage of people that have pension plans, plus a secure Social Security system.
 Did you say you're unemployed?
 See, the first thing we have to do is get you a job.
And that's the economic package again.
Create jobs and opportunities.
Reduce the capital gains rate.
Reduce regulatory reform.
Stop some of this senseless litigation and let people work in America.
And I think that's that's the thrust we will make.
Obviously if Social Security is a very important program, it should -- it will be preserved.
Democrats or Republicans, it will be preserved.
We want to make certain we protect those in the pipeline just as we did back in 1983 and we did it on a bipartisan basis.
We took it out of politics.
people get so tired of politics.
We ought to do the same with Medicare.
Maybe we can make a deal here tonight.
 Let me tell you what we have done.
We have concluded with Japan 21 -- about to be 22 -- trade agreements now.
And since we did that, in the areas where we concluded, trade agreements or exports to Japan have gone up by 85 percent in the last four years and our trade deficit with Japan has gone down.
Until about five months ago the Japanese economy was in a deep recession.
It's coming back now, so they can buy even more American products, and I think it will go down more.
But I'm very -- that's one of the real success stories here of the work we've done.
We're selling Japanese rice from California for the first time.
I visited a Chrysler dealership in Tokyo.
I visited a Jeep plant, oldest plant in America, a plant in Toledo, Ohio, where they're going to export 41,000 right hand drive Jeeps this year, and they've got 700 new jobs because of it.
There's no easy way to do this when you're dealing with an economy that's traditionally been more closed than one that's traditionally been more open.
You have to gut it out, issue by issue by issue.
We agreed in principle on an insurance agreement, and we're working on three or four other areas now, but the way you have to do it is make sure you're competitive.
We're the most competitive country in the world now, and then just fight to open those markets and go try to make the sale, and that's what our trade ambassador our commerce secretary and all the other people in our administration are trying to do.
 Well, the bottom line is we have to stop exporting jobs here.
There are 357, 000 good jobs -- manufacturing jobs, which are lost.
And I assume some of those are because of our trading partners.
We didn't have access to their markets.
We ought to insist on access.
If we don't have access to their markets the same way they've access our markets, we ought to say, "Wait, that's enough.
Time out.
When you give us access, we'll give you access."
It's very hard to get into the Japan market, as everybody knows.
They want to get into our market.
They sell a lot of automobiles here, create a lot of jobs -- those who sell exports.
And that's very important to the economy, but I think we want to make certain.
I supported the President's trade policy.
But we got to be more aggressive.
Once you have a policy, then you have to go out and be aggressive and enforce that policy.
There are American jobs that are being lost.
This is what Ross Perot complains about.
And I'd say to the Reform party, take a look at the Republican party.
We're the reform party, and we're going to make things better, and one of the things we're going to do is stop exporting jobs.
 Let me say again, we've had over 200 separate trade agreements in the last four years.
By far, the largest number in American history -- not just the big ones you read about, but a lot of smaller ones.
And now what we have to do is to focus on those things we're real good at and make sure we're getting a fair deal.
We just had a pretty serious dispute with China because they were copying our CDs, and costing thousands of jobs in places like California.
So we have -- as we said, if you want to keep doing business and selling your products over here, you're going to have to quit pirating our CDs, and they agreed to do things and verify that they had done it, which will make the problem much better.
There is not a simple answer.
You have to work on this day in and day out, every month ,every year, every issue, to make sure that we have not only free trade but fair trade.
I'm proud that we're better off on that than we were four years ago.
 Hi, Rod.
 Well no doubt about it, our founding fathers had a great deal of wisdom.
In addition to what you mentioned, they also were concerned about this all-powerful central government in Washington, D.C., that'd in effect confiscate your property, so -- I carry it in my pocket -- I can't pull it out or I'd violate the rules -- a copy of the Tenth Amendment which says we ought to return power to the states and the people, the people here.
You ought to make more decisions.
Honor, duty, and country, that's what America is all about.
Certainly the President of the United States, the highest office in the world, the most important office in the world, has a responsibility to young people, as we talked about earlier.
To everyone.
By example.
And when it comes to public ethics, he has a responsibility.
And you have 30-some in your administration, either left or being investigated or in jail or whatever, then you've got an ethical problem.
This is public ethics; I'm not talking about private ethics.
Talking about public ethics.
When you have 900 files gathered up by some guy who is a bouncer in a bar and hired a security officer to collect files, in Watergate -- I know a person who went to jail for looking at one file, one FBI file.
There are 900 sequestered in the White House.
900.
People like you.
Why should they be rifling through your files?
The president has a great responsibility.
That's one that I understand and certainly will carry out.
 This is the most religious, great country in history.
And yet, interestingly enough, we have the most religious freedom of any country in the world, including the freedom not to believe.
And now we have all these people just up the road in Los Angeles County, we have people from 150 different racial and ethnic groups and tons of different religions, but the fundamental tenets of virtually every religion are the same, and what I try to do is to support policies that would respect religion and then help parents inculcate those values to their children.
Let me very briefly give you some examples.
One of my proudest moments was signing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, that says the government has got to bend over backwards before we interfere with religious practice.
So I changed the Justice Department's effort to get a church to pay back a man tithe, because he was bankrupt when he gave it.
I have supported character education programs in our schools, drug-free schools programs.
I supported giving parents a V-chip on their television so if they don't want their young kids to watch things they shouldn't watch, they wouldn't have to.
That is the kind of thing we have to do, give people like you and our families the power to give those values to our children.
 I think it's -- before I came in, my wife and daughter and I had a prayer.
Because it's God's will, whatever happens.
It's God's will, it'll happen.
The constitutional amendment for voluntary prayer in school, in my view would be a great idea.
I support it; the president opposes it.
It seems to me the president, whoever the president may be, this is one of his highest responsibilities.
People look to the President of the United States more than any other person in America.
And that's the way it's always been, and that's the way it always will be.
 I want to answer your question, but let me say one other thing.
We don't need a constitutional amendment for kids to pray, and what I did was to have the justice department and the education department for the first time ever issue a set of guidelines that we gave to every school in America, saying that children could not be interfered with in religious advocacy when they were praying, when they were doing whatever they could do under the constitution, just because they were on a public school ground, and I think anyone who's experienced this will tell you that our administration has done more than any in years to clarify the freedom of religion in the public square, including in the public schools.
Now, I think I have to let Senator Dole speak for himself.
It wouldn't be fair for me to do that.
I would wind up -- I mean, it's the last question and I would mischaracterize it to try to make you happy.
Let me tell you what I feel.
We have a lot of differences in our country, and some of us believe that other people's decisions are wrong, even immoral.
But under our constitution, if you show up tomorrow and obey the law, and you work hard and you do what you're supposed to do, you are entitled to equal treatment.
That's the way the system works.
All over the world, people are being torn apart -- Bosnia, the Middle East, Northern Ireland, Rwanda, Burundi -- you name it -- because of all their differences.
We still have some of that hatred inside us.
You see it in the church burnings.
And one of the things I've tried hardest to do is to tell the American people that we have to get beyond that, we have to understand that we're stronger when we unite around shared values instead of being divided by our differences.
 Well, I hope I made my answer clear.
I said I'm opposed to discrimination.
You know we've suffered discrimination in the disability community.
There are 43 million of us.
And I can recall cases where people would cross the street rather than meet somebody in a wheelchair.
So we want to end discrimination.
I think that answers itself.
No discrimination in America.
We've made that clear.
And I would just say that it seems to me that that's the way it ought to be.
We shouldn't discriminate -- race, color, whatever -- life-style, disability.
This is America.
And we're all proud of it.
But we're not there yet.
What we need is good, strong leadership going in the next century.
I'm sorry we didn't have a foreign policy question, because just this week Secretary Christopher said, "Well, we really didn't know much the first couple of years about foreign policy."
Now that was quite an admission.
It underscores what I had to say in the Hartford debate, that there is really no foreign policy in this administration.
It's sort of ad hoc, just whatever comes up, we'll deal with it.
Unfortunately, we didn't have more questions on that.
 Let me say again, there is no more important responsibility for the president than to say if you believe in the constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the Declaration of Independence, that's all we need to know.
And you can be part of our America and you can walk across that bridge to the 21st century with us.
And we are not well served when we attack each other in a kind of ad hominem way.
It doesn't create jobs.
It doesn't educate children.
It doesn't solve problems.
We need to be disagreeing on ideas, honestly, and talking about the future.
The future will be the greatest time in this country's history if we can beat this division that is bedeviling the whole rest of the world.
 Well, let me thank everybody here at the University and, Jim, thank you.
All the people who may still be watching or viewing.
This is what it's all about.
It's not about me.
It's not about President Clinton.
It's about the process.
It's about selecting a president of the United States.
So we have our differences.
We should have our differences.
Mentioned other parties.
They have their differences.
We all agreed it would be a pretty dull place.
We should have more debates.
Maybe we will have another debate on the economy.
But I would just say this.
This is the highest honor that I have ever had in my life, to think that somebody from Russell, Kansas, somebody who grew up living in a basement apartment, someone whose parents didn't finish high school, somebody who spent about 39 months in hospitals after World War II, someone who uses a buttonhook every day to get dressed.
Somebody who understands that there're real Americans out there with real problems, whether soccer moms, or the single parents, the families or the seniors, or people with disabilities, whoever it may be.
There are some very fundamental differences in this campaign.
President Clinton opposes term limits, President Clinton opposes a constitutional amendment to balance the budget.
President Clinton opposes voluntary prayer amendment.
Opposes an amendment to protect the flag of the United States of America.
People give their lives.
Couple of service men here.
They sacrifice, they give everything for America.
We ought to protect the American flag with a constitutional amendment.
But beyond that we need to address the economy.
I will just say my time is running out here.
It's a very proud moment for me.
What I want the voters to do is to make a decision.
And I want them to be proud of their vote in the years ahead.
Proud that they voted for the right candidate.
Proud that they voted hopefully for me.
And I'll just make you one promise, my word is good.
Democrats and Republicans said Bob Dole's word is good.
I keep my word.
I promise you the economy is going to get better.
We're going to have a good economic package.
We're going into the next century a better America.
Thank you.
 Thank you, Jim.
And thank you, ladies and gentlemen, and all the people who are watching.
One thing I would like to say is I agree with what Senator Dole said.
It's a remarkable thing in a country like ours, a man who grew up in Russell, Kansas, and one who was born to a widowed mother in Hope, Arkansas, could wind up running for president.
Could have a chance to serve as president.
First thing I want to say is thank you for giving me the chance to be president.
This election is about two different visions about how we should go into the 21st Century.
Would we be better off as I believe, working together to give each other the tools we need to make the most of our God-given potential, or are we better off saying, you're on your own?
Would we be better off building that bridge to the future together so we can all walk across it or saying you can get across yourself?
If you don't agree -- leave this room with anything else tonight and if the people watching us don't leave with anything else, I hope you will leave with this.
This is a real important election.
The world is changing dramatically in how we work and how we live, how we relate to each other, huge changes.
And the decisions we make will have enormous practical consequences.
So we've talked about our responsibility tonight.
I want to talk about your responsibility, and your responsibility.
Your responsibility is to show up on November the 5th.
Because you're going to decide whether we're going to balance the budget now, but protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment.
You will decide whether we're going to keep fighting crime with a Brady Bill, assault weapons and finish putting those 100,000 police.
Whether we're going to move a million people from welfare to work.
Whether we're going to give our families more protection for their kids against drugs and tobacco and gangs and guns.
Whether we're going to give our children a world-class education.
Where every eight-year-old can read.
Every 12-year-old can log in on the Internet.
Every 18-year-old can go to college.
If we do those things we will build that bridge to the 21st Century and the greatest country in history will be even greater.
Thank you.
 I have, I have.
First question is what's in the best interests of the United States?
What's in the best interests of our people?
When it comes to foreign policy that will be my guiding question.
Is it in our nation's interests?
Peace in the Middle East is in our nation's interests.
Having a hemisphere that is free for trade and peaceful is in our nation's interests.
Strong relations in Europe is in our nation's interest.
I've thought a lot about what it means to be the president.
I also understand that an administration is not one person, but an administration is dedicated citizens who are called by the president to serve the country, to serve a cause greater than self, and so I've thought about an administration of people who represent all America, but people who understand my compassionate and conservative philosophy.
I haven't started naming names except for one person, and that's Mr. Richard Cheney who I thought did a great job the other night.
He's a vice presidential nominee who represents -- I think people got to see why I picked him.
He's man of solid judgment and he's going to be a person to stand by my side.
One of the things I've done in Texas is I've been able to put together a good team of people.
I've been able to set clear goals.
The goals ought to be an education system that leaves no child behind, Medicare for our seniors, a Social Security system that's safe and secure, foreign policy that's in our nation's interest, and a strong military, and then bring people together to achieve those goals.
That's what a Chief Executive Officer does.
So I've thought long and hard about the honor of being the President of the United States.
 Yes, Jim.
I've thought a lot about that particular question, and I see our greatest national strength coming from what we stand for in the world.
I see it as a question of values.
It is a great tribute to our founders that 224 years later this nation is now looked to by the peoples on every other continent and the peoples from every part of this earth as a kind of model for what their future could be.
And I don't think that's just the kind of exaggeration that we take pride in as Americans.
It's really true, even the ones that sometimes shake their fists at us.
As soon as they have a change that allows the people to speak freely, they're wanting to develop some kind of blueprint that will help them be like us more, freedom, free markets, political freedom.
So I think first and foremost our power ought to be wielded to in ways that form a more perfect union.
The power of example is America's greatest power in the world.
And that means, for example, standing up for human rights.
It means addressing the problems of injustice and inequity, along the lines of race and ethnicity here at home, because in all these other places around the world where they're having these terrible problems, when they feel hope, it is often because they see in us a reflection of their potential.
So we've got to enforce our civil rights laws.
We've got to deal with things like racial profiling.
And we have to keep our military strong.
We have the strongest military, and I'll do whatever is necessary, if I'm president, to make sure that it stays that way.
But our real power comes, I think, from our values.
 Well, I think they ought to look at us as a country that understands freedom where it doesn't matter who you are or how you're raised or where you're from, that you can succeed.
I don't think they'll look at us with envy.
It really depends upon how our nation conducts itself in foreign policy.
If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us.
If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.
And it's -- our nation stands alone right now in the world in terms of power, and that's why we have to be humble.
And yet project strength in a way that promotes freedom.
So I don't think they ought to look at us in any way other than what we are.
We're a freedom-loving nation and if we're an arrogant nation they'll view us that way, but if we're a humble nation they'll respect us.
 I agree with that.
I agree with that.
I think that one of the problems that we have faced in the world is that we are so much more powerful than any single nation has been in relationship to the rest of the world than at any time in history, that I know about, anyway.
That there is some resentment of U.S. power.
So I think that the idea of humility is an important one.
But I think that we also have to have a sense of mission in the world.
We have to protect our capacity to push forward what America's all about.
That means not only military strength and our values, it also means keeping our economy strong.
You know, in the last, or two decades ago, it was routine for leaders of foreign countries to come over here and say you guys have got to do something about these horrendous deficits because it's causing tremendous problems for the rest of the world, and we were lectured to all the time.
The fact that we have the strongest economy in history today is not good enough.
We need to do more.
But the fact that it is so strong enables us to project the power for good that America can represent.
 Yes, it does.
Take, for example, Third World debt.
I think we ought to be forgiving Third World debt under certain conditions.
I think, for example, if we're convinced that a Third World country that's got a lot of debt would reform itself, that the money wouldn't go into the hands of a few but would go to help people, I think it makes sense for us to use our wealth in that way, or to trade debt for valuable rain forest lands, makes that much sense, yes.
We do have an obligation, but we can't be all things to all people.
We can help build coalitions but we can't put our troops all around the world.
We can lend money but we have to do it wisely.
We shouldn't be lending money to corrupt officials.
So we got to be guarded in our generosity.
 The first priority has to be on ending the violence, dampening down the tensions that have arisen there.
We need to call upon Syria to release the three Israeli soldiers who have been captured.
We need to insist that Arafat send out instructions to halt some of the provocative acts of violence that have been going on.
I think that we also have to keep a weather eye toward Saddam Hussein because he is taking advantage of this situation to once again make threats, and he needs to understand that he's not only dealing with Israel, he is dealing -- he's dealing with us if he is making the kind of threats that he's talking about there.
The use of diplomacy in this situation has already, well, it goes hour-by-hour and day-by-day now.
It's a very tense situation there.
But in the last 24 hours there has been some subsiding of the violence there.
It's too much to hope that this is going to continue, but I do hope that it will continue.
Our country has been very active with regular conversations with the leaders there.
And we just have to take it day-to-day right now.
But one thing I would say where diplomacy is concerned, Israel should feel absolutely secure about one thing.
Our bonds with Israel are larger than agreements or disagreements on some details of diplomatic initiatives.
They are historic, they are strong, and they are enduring.
And our ability to serve as an honest broker is something that we need to shepherd.
 Well, I think during the campaign, particularly now during this difficult period, we ought to be speaking with one voice, and I appreciate the way the administration has worked hard to calm the tensions.
Like the vice president, I call on Chairman Arafat to have his people pull back to make the peace.
I think credibility is going to be very important in the future in the Middle East.
I want everybody to know should I be the president Israel's going to be our friend.
I'm going to stand by Israel.
Secondly, that I think it's important to reach out to moderate Arab nations, like Jordan and Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
It's important to be friends with people when you don't need each other so that when you do there's a strong bond of friendship.
And that's going to be particularly important in dealing not only with situations such as now occurring in Israel, but with Saddam Hussein.
The coalition against Saddam has fallen apart or it's unraveling, let's put it that way.
The sanctions are being violated.
We don't know whether he's developing weapons of mass destruction.
He better not be or there's going to be a consequence should I be the president.
But it's important to have credibility and credibility is formed by being strong with your friends and resolute in your determination.
One of the reasons why I think it's important for this nation to develop an anti-ballistic missile system that we can share with our allies in the Middle East if need be to keep the peace to be able to say to the Saddam Husseins of the world or the Iranians, don't dare threaten our friends.
It's also important to keep strong ties in the Middle East, credible ties, because of the energy crisis we're now in.
After all, a lot of the energy is produced from the Middle East, and so I appreciate what the administration is doing.
I hope to get a sense of should I be fortunate to be the president how my administration will react to the Middle East.
 Well, we stand with Israel, but we have maintained the ability to serve as an honest broker.
And one of the reasons that's important is that Israel cannot have direct dialogue with some of the people on the other side of conflicts, especially during times of tension, unless that dialogue comes through us.
And if we throw away that ability to serve as an honest broker, then we have thrown -- we will have thrown away a strategic asset that's important not only to us but also to Israel.
 I do.
I do think this, though.
When it comes to timetables it can't be the United States timetable as to how discussions take place.
It's got to be a timetable that all parties can agree to, like the Palestinians and Israelis.
Secondly, any lasting peace is going to have to be a peace that's good for both sides.
And therefore, the term honest broker makes sense.
This current administration's worked hard to keep the parties at the table.
I will try to do the same thing.
But it won't be on my timetable, it will be on the timetable that people are comfortable with in the Middle East.
 I haven't heard a big difference in the last few exchanges.
 That's hard to tell.
I think that, you know, I would hope to be able to convince people I could handle the Iraqi situation better.
 I would like to, of course, and I presume this administration would as well.
We don't know -- there are no inspectors now in Iraq, the coalition that was in place isn't as strong as it used to be.
He is a danger.
We don't want him fishing in troubled waters in the Middle East.
And it's going to be hard, it's going to be important to rebuild that coalition to keep the pressure on him.
 I do.
 Well, when I got to be a part of the current administration, it was right after -- I was one of the few members of my political party to support former President Bush in the Persian Gulf War resolution, and at the end of that war, for whatever reason, it was not finished in a way that removed Saddam Hussein from power.
I know there are all kinds of circumstances and explanations.
But the fact is that that's the situation that was left when I got there.
And we have maintained the sanctions.
Now I want to go further.
I want to give robust support to the groups that are trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein, and I know there are allegations that they're too weak to do it, but that's what they said about the forces that were opposing Milosevic in Serbia, and you know, the policy of enforcing sanctions against Serbia has just resulted in a spectacular victory for democracy just in the past week, and it seems to me that having taken so long to see the sanctions work there, building upon the policy of containment that was successful over a much longer period of time against the former Soviet Union in the communist block, seems a little early to declare that we should give up on the sanctions.
I know the governor's not necessarily saying that but, you know, all of these flights that have come in, all of them have been in accordance with the sanctions regime, I'm told, except for three where they notified, and they're trying to break out of the box, there's no question about it.
I don't think they should be allowed to.
 No, of course not, absolutely not, I want them to be tougher.
 I think it's a triumph.
I thought the president made the right decision in joining NATO and bombing Serbia.
I supported them when they did so.
I called upon the Congress not to hamstring the administration, and in terms of forcing troop withdrawals on a timetable that wasn't necessarily in our best interest or fit our nation's strategy, and so I think it's good public policy, I think it worked, and I'm pleased I took -- made the decision I made.
I'm pleased the president made the decision he made.
Because freedom took hold in that part of the world, but there's a lot of work left to be done, however.
 Yes, I think it is.
Absolutely.
I don't think he would have fallen had we not used the force.
And I know there are some in our party that disagree with that sentiment.
I supported the president.
I thought he made the right decision to do so.
I didn't think he necessarily made the right decision to take land troops off the table right before we committed ourselves offensively, but nevertheless, it worked.
The administration deserves credit for having made it work.
It is important for NATO to have it work.
It's important for NATO to be strong and confident and to help keep the peace in Europe.
And one of the reasons I felt so strongly that the United States needed to participate was because of our relations with NATO, and NATO is going to be an important part of keeping the peace in the future.
Now, there's more work to do.
Remains to be seen, however, whether or not there's going to be a political settlement in Kosovo, and I certainly hope there is one.
Im on record as saying at some point in time I hope our European friends become the peacekeepers in Bosnia and in the Balkans.
I hope that they put the troops on the ground so that we can withdraw our troops and focus our military on fighting and winning war.
 Well, I've been kind of a hard-liner on this issue for more than eight years.
When I was in the senate before I became vice president I was pushing for stronger action against Milosevic.
He caused the death of so many people.
He was the last communist party boss there and then he became a dictator that by some other label he was still essentially a communist dictator.
And unfortunately now he is trying to reassert himself in Serbian politics.
Already just today the members of his political party said that they were going to ignore the orders of the new president of Serbia, and that they question his legitimacy, and he's still going to try to be actively involved.
He is an indicted war criminal.
He should be held accountable.
Now, I did want to pick up on one of the statements earlier, and maybe I have heard, maybe I have heard the previous statements wrong, Governor.
In some of the discussions we've had about when it's appropriate for the U.S. to use force around the world, at times the standards that you've laid down have given me the impression that if it's something like a genocide taking place or what they called ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, that that alone would not be, that that wouldn't be the kind of situation that would cause you to think that the U.S. ought to get involved with troops.
Now, have to be other factors involved for me to want to be involved.
But by itself, that to me can bring into play a fundamental American strategic interest because I think it's based on our values.
Now, have I got that wrong?
 Trying to figure out who the questioner was.
If I think it's in our nation's strategic interest I'll commit troops.
I thought it was in our strategic interests to keep Milosevic in check because of our relations in NATO, and that's why I took the position I took.
I think it's important for NATO to be strong and confident.
I felt like unchecked Milosevic would harm NATO, and so it depends on the situation, Mr. Vice President.
 Can you run through the list again?
 I thought that was a mistake.
 I supported that.
 I supported that.
 Yes, I voted for it, supported it.
 Of course, and that again -- no, I think that that was ill-considered.
I did support it at the time.
It was in the previous administration, in the Bush-Quayle administration, and I think in retrospect the lessons there are ones that we should take very, very seriously.
 Oh, yes.
 Yes.
 Yes.
 Make a couple comments.
 Started off as a humanitarian mission and it changed into a nation-building mission, and that's where the mission went wrong.
The mission was changed.
And as a result, our nation paid a price.
And so I don't think our troops ought to be used for what's called nation-building.
I think our troops ought to be used to fight and win war.
I think our troops ought to be used to help overthrow the dictator when it's in our best interests.
But in this case it was a nation-building exercise, and same with Haiti.
I wouldn't have supported either.
 Yes.
 Yes.
 Yes.
Some of them I've got a conflict of interest on, if you know what I mean.
 I think the administration did the right thing in that case.
I do.
It was a horrible situation, no one liked to see it on our TV screens, but it's a case where we need to make sure we have an early warning system in place in places where there could be ethnic cleansing and genocide the way we saw it there in Rwanda.
And that's a case where we need to use our influence to have countries in Africa come together and help deal with the situation.
The administration, seems like we're having a great love fest tonight, but the administration made the right decision on training Nigerian troops for situations just such as this in Rwanda, and so I thought they made the right decision not to send U.S. troops into Rwanda.
 I'd like to come back to the question of nation building, but let me address the question directly, first.
Fine.
We did, actually, send troops into Rwanda to help with the humanitarian relief measures.
My wife Tipper, who is here, actually went on a military plane with General Sholicatchvieli on one of those flights.
But I think in retrospect we were too late getting in there.
We could have saved more lives if we had acted earlier.
But I do not think that it was an example of a conflict where we should have put our troops in to try to separate the parties for this reason, Jim.
One of the criteria that I think is important in deciding when and if we should ever get involved around the world is whether or not our national security interest is involved, if we can really make the difference with military forces.
If we tried everything else, if we have allies.
In the Balkans we have allies, NATO, ready, willing and able to go and carry a big part of the burden.
In Africa we did not.
Now, we have tried -- our country has tried to create an Africa crisis response team there, and we've met some resistance.
We have had some luck with Nigeria, but in Sierra Leon, and now that Nigeria has become a democracy, and we hope it stays that way, then maybe we can build on that.
But because we had no allies and because it was very unclear that we could actually accomplish what we would want to accomplish about putting military forces there, I think it was the right thing not to jump in, as heartbreaking as it was, but I think we should have come in much quicker with the humanitarian mission.
 Well, I understand, and Africa is important.
And we've got to do a lot of work in Africa to promote democracy and trade, and there are some -- Vice President mentioned Nigeria is a fledgling democracy.
We have to work with Nigeria.
Its an important continent.
But there's got to be priorities, and Middle East is a priority for a lot of reasons, as is Europe and the Far East, our own hemisphere.
And those are my four top priorities should I be the president, not to say we won't be engaged nor work hard to get other nations to come together to prevent atrocity.
I thought the best example of a way to handle the situation was East Timor when we provided logistical support to the Australians, support that only we can provide.
I thought that was a good model.
But we can't be all things to all people in the world, Jim.
And I think that's where maybe the vice president and I begin to have some differences.
I'm worried about overcommitting our military around the world.
I want to be judicious in its use.
You mentioned Haiti.
I wouldn't have sent troops to Haiti.
I didn't think it was a mission worthwhile.
It was a nation building mission, and it was not very successful.
It cost us billions, a couple billions of dollars, and I'm not so sure democracy is any better off in Haiti than it was before.
 I don't think we agree on that.
I would certainly also be judicious in evaluating any potential use of American troops overseas.
I think we have to be very reticent about that.
But look, Jim, the world is changing so rapidly.
The way I see it, the world is getting much closer together.
Like it or not, we are now -- the United States is now the natural leader of the world.
All these other countries are looking to us.
Now, just because we cannot be involved everywhere, and shouldn't be, doesn't mean that we should shy away from going in anywhere.
Now, both of us are kind of, I guess, stating the other's position in a maximalist extreme way, but I think there is a difference here.
This idea of nation building is kind of a pejorative phrase, but think about the great conflict of the past century, World War II.
During the years between World War I and World War II, a great lesson was learned by our military leaders and the people of the United States.
The lesson was that in the aftermath of World War I, we kind of turned our backs and left them to their own devices and they brewed up a lot of trouble that quickly became World War II.
And acting upon that lesson in the aftermath of our great victory in World War II, we laid down the Marshall Plan, President Truman did.
We got intimately involved in building NATO and other structures there.
We still have lots of troops in Europe.
And what did we do in the late '40's and '50's and '60's?
We were nation building.
And it was economic.
But it was also military.
And the confidence that those countries recovering from the wounds of war had by having troops there.
We had civil administrators come in to set up their ways of building their towns back.
 First let me just say one comment about what the vice president said.
I think one of the lessons in between World War I and World War II is we let our military atrophy.
And we can't do that.
We've got to rebuild our military.
But one of the problems we have in the military is we're in a lot of places around the world.
And I mentioned one, and that's the Balkans.
I would very much like to get our troops out of there.
I recognize we can't do it now, nor do I advocate an immediate withdrawal.
That would be an abrogation of our agreement with NATO.
No one is suggesting that.
But I think it ought to be one of our priorities to work with our European friends to convince them to put troops on the ground.
And there is an example.
Haiti is another example.
Now there are some places where I think -- you know, I've supported the administration in Columbia.
I think it's important for us to be training Columbians in that part of the world.
The hemisphere is in our interest to have a peaceful Columbia.
But --
 I don't think so.
I think what we need to do is convince people who live in the lands they live in to build the nations.
Maybe I'm missing something here.
I mean, we're going to have kind of a nation building core from America?
Absolutely not.
Our military is meant to fight and win war.
That's what it's meant to do.
And when it gets overextended, morale drops.
I strongly believe we need to have a military presence in the Korean peninsula, not only to keep the peace in the peninsula, but to keep regional stability.
And I strongly believe we need to keep a presence in NATO, but I'm going to be judicious as to how to use the military.
It needs to be in our vital interest, the mission needs to be clear, and the extra strategy obvious.
 I don't disagree with that.
I certainly don't disagree that we ought to get our troops home from places like the Balkans as soon as we can, as soon as the mission is complete.
That's what we did in Haiti.
There are no more than a handful of American military personnel in Haiti now.
And Haitians have their problems, but we gave them a chance to restore democracy.
That's really about all we can do.
But if you have a situation like that right in our backyard with chaos about to break out and flotillas forming to come across the water, and all kinds of violence there, right in one of our neighboring countries there, then I think that we did the right thing there.
And as for this idea of nation building, the phrase sounds grandiose.
And, you know, we can't be -- we can't allow ourselves to get overextended.
I certainly agree with that.
And that's why I've supported building up our capacity.
I've devoted in the budget I've proposed, as I said last week, more than twice as much as the governor has proposed.
I think that it's in better shape now than he generally does.
We've had some disagreements about that.
He said that two divisions would have to report not ready for duty, and that's not what the joint chiefs say.
But there's no doubt that we have to continue building up readiness and military strength.
And we have to also be very cautious in the way we use our military.
 Well, I mentioned Third World debt.
 That's a place where we can use our generosity to influence in a positive way, influence nations.
I believe we ought to have foreign aid, but I don't think we ought to just have foreign aid for the sake of foreign aid.
I think foreign aid needs to be used to encourage markets and reform.
I think a lot of times we just spend aid and say we feel better about it and it ends up being spent the wrong way, and there's some pretty egregious examples recently.
One being Russia, where we had IMF loans that ended up in the pockets of a lot of powerful people and didn't help the nation.
I think the IMF has got a role in the world, but I don't want to see the IMF out there as a way to say to world bankers, if you make a bad loan, we'll bail you out.
It needs to be available for emergency situations.
I thought the President did the right thing with Mexico and was very strongly supportive of the administration in Mexico.
But I don't think the IMF ought to be a stop loss for people who ought to be able to evaluate risks themselves.
So I'll look at every place where we're investing money.
I just want to make sure the return is good.
 No, I would make some changes.
I think there need to be reforms in the IMF.
I've generally supported it, but I've seen them make some calls that I thought were highly questionable.
And I think that there's a general agreement in many parts of the world now that there ought to be changes in the IMF.
The World Bank I think is generally doing a better job, but I think one of the big issues here that doesn't get nearly enough attention is the issue of corruption.
The governor mentioned it earlier.
I've worked on this issue.
It's an enormous problem and corruption in official agencies, like militaries and police departments around the world, customs officials, that's one of the worst forms of it.
And we have got to again lead by example and help these other countries that are trying to straighten out their situations find the tools in order to do it.
I just think, Jim, that this is an absolutely unique period in world history.
The worlds coming together, as I said, they're looking to us.
And we have a fundamental choice to make.
Are we going to step up to the plate as a nation the way we did after World War II, the way that generation of heroes said okay, the United States is going to be the leader.
And the world benefitted tremendously from the courage that they showed in those post-war years.
I think that in the aftermath of the Cold War, it's time for us to do something very similar, to step up to the plate, to provide the leadership on the environment, leadership to make sure the world economy keeps moving in the right direction.
Again, that means not running big deficits here and not squandering our surplus.
It means having intelligent decisions that keep our prosperity going and shepherds that economic strength so that we can provide that leadership role.
 Let me comment on that.
I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say this is the way it's got to be.
We can help.
And maybe it's just our difference in government, the way we view government.
I want to empower the people.
I want to help people help themselves, not have government tell people what to do.
I just don't think it's the role of the United States to walk into a country and say, we do it this way, so should you. I think we can help.
I know we've got to encourage democracy in the marketplaces.
But take Russia, for example.
We went into Russia, we said here is some IMF money, and it ended up in Viktor Chemomyrdin's pocket, and others, and yet we played like there was reform.
The only people that are going to reform Russia are Russia.
They're going to have to make the decision themselves.
Mr. Putin is going to have to make the decision as to whether or not he wants to adhere to rule of law and normal accounting practices so that if countries and/or entities invest capital, there's a reasonable rate of return, a way to get the money out of the economy.
But Russia has to make the decision.
We can work with them on security matters, for example, but it's their call to make.
So I'm not exactly sure where the vice president is coming from, but I think one way for us to end up being viewed as the ugly American is for us to go around the world saying, we do it this way, so should you. Now, we trust freedom.
We know freedom is a powerful, powerful, powerful force, much bigger than the United States of America, as we saw recently in the Balkans.
But maybe I misunderstand where you're coming from, Mr. Vice President, but I think the United States must be humble and must be proud and confident of our values, but humble in how we treat nations that are figuring out how to chart their own course.
 Far be it from me to suggest otherwise.
(LAUGHTER)
 Yes, I would.
The only thing an executive order can accomplish is to ban it in federal law enforcement agencies, but I would also support a law in the Congress that would have the effect of doing the same thing.
I just -- I think that racial profiling is a serious problem.
I remember when the stories first came out about the stops in New Jersey by the highway patrol there.
And I know it's been going on a long time.
In some ways this is just a new label for something that has been going on for years.
But I have to confess that it was the first time that I really focused on it in a new way.
And I was surprised at the extent of it.
And I think we've now got so many examples around the country that we really have to find ways to end this.
Imagine what it -- what it is like for someone to be singled out unfairly, unjustly, and feel the unfair force of law simply because of race or ethnicity.
Now, that runs counter to what the United States of America is all about at our core.
And it's not an easy problem to solve.
But if I am entrusted with the presidency, it will be the first Civil Rights Act of the 21st century.
 Yeah, I can't imagine what it would be like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed.
That's just flat wrong, and that's not what America is all about.
And so we ought to do everything we can to end racial profiling.
One of my concerns, though, is I don't want to federalize the local police forces.
I want to -- obviously in the egregious cases we need to enforce civil rights law, but we need to make sure that internal affairs divisions at the local level do their job and be given a chance to do their job.
I believe in local control of governments, and obviously if they don't there needs to be a consequence at the federal level.
But it's very important that we not overstep our bounds and I think most people -- most police officers are good, dedicated, honorable citizens who are doing their job, putting their lives at risk who aren't bigoted or aren't prejudiced.
I don't think they ought to be held guilty.
But I do think we need to find out where racial profiling occurs and do something about it and say to the local folks, get it done.
And if you can't, there will be a federal consequence.
 Yeah.
 I would agree.
And I also agree that most police officers, of course, are doing a good job and hate this practice also.
I talked to an African-American police officer in Springfield, Massachusetts not long ago who raised this question and said that in his opinion one of the biggest solutions is in the training.
And not only the training in police procedures, but human relations.
And I think that racial profiling is part of a larger issue of how we deal with race in America.
And as for singling people out because of race, you know, James Byrd was singled out because of his race in Texas.
And other Americans have been singled out because of their race or ethnicity.
And that's why I think we can embody our values by passing a hate crimes law.
I think these crimes are different.
I think they're different because they're based on prejudice and hatred, which gives rise to crimes that have not just a single victim, but they're intended to stigmatize and dehumanize a whole group of people.
 No, I don't, really.
 No.
We've got one in Texas.
And guess what?
The three men who murdered James Byrd, guess what's going to happen to them?
They're going to be put to death.
A jury found them guilty.
It's going to be hard to punish them any worse after they get put to death.
And it's the right cause.
It's the right decision.
Secondly, there is other forms of racial profiling that goes on in America.
Arab-Americans are racially profiled in what is called secret evidence.
People are stopped, and we have to do something about that.
My friend, Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan, is pushing a law to make sure that Arab-Americans are treated with respect.
So racial profiling isn't just an issue at local police forces.
It's an issue throughout our society.
And as we become a diverse society, we're going to have to deal with it more and more.
I believe, though -- I believe, as sure as I'm sitting here, that most Americans really care.
They're tolerant people.
They're good, tolerant people.
It's the very few that create most of the crises, and we just have to find them and deal with them.
 Let me tell you where the biggest discrimination comes.
In public education when we just move children through the schools.
My friend, Phyllis Hunter, is here.
She had one of the greatest lines of all lines.
She said, reading is the new civil right.
She's right.
And to make sure our society is as hopeful as it possibly can be, every single child in America must be educated.
I mean every child.
It starts with making sure every child learns to read.
K-2 diagnostic testing so we know whether or not there's a deficiency.
Curriculum that works and phonics needs to be an integral part of our reading curriculum.
Intensive reading laboratories, teacher retraining.
I mean, there needs to be a wholesale effort against racial profiling, which is illiterate children.
We can do better in our public schools.
We can close an achievement gap, and it starts with making sure we have strong accountability, Jim.
One of the cornerstones of reform, and good reform, is to measure.
Because when you measure you can ask the question, do they know?
Is anybody being profiled?
Is anybody being discriminated against?
It becomes a tool, a corrective tool.
And I believe the federal government must say that if you receive any money, any money from the federal government for disadvantaged children, for example, you must show us whether or not the children are learning.
And if they are, fine.
And if they're not, there has to be a consequence.
And so to make sure we end up getting rid of basic structural prejudice is education.
There is nothing more prejudiced than not educating a child.
 Well, I think we need tough enforcement of the civil rights laws.
I think we still need affirmative action.
I would pass a hate crimes law, as I said, and I guess I had misunderstood the governor's previous position.
The Byrd family may have a misunderstanding of it in Texas also.
But I would like to shift, if I could, to the big issue of education.
 Well, I had thought that there was a controversy at the end of the legislative session where the hate crimes law in Texas was -- failed, and that the Byrd family, among others, asked you to support it, Governor, and it died in committee for lack of support.
Am I wrong about that?
 Well, you don't realize we have a hate crimes statute?
We do.
GORE: I'm talking about the one that was proposed to deal --
 No -- well, what the Vice President must not understand is we've got a hate crimes bill in Texas.
And secondly, the people that murdered Mr. Byrd got the ultimate punishment.
The death penalty.
 In this case when you murder somebody it's hate, Jim.
The crime is hate.
And they got the ultimate punishment.
I'm not exactly sure how you enhance the penalty any more than the death penalty.
We happen to have a statute on the books that's a hate crimes statute in Texas.
 May I respond?
 I don't want to jump in.
I may have been misled by all the news reports about this matter, because the law that was proposed in Texas that had the support of the Byrd family and a whole lot of people in Texas did, in fact, die in committee.
There may be some other statute that was already on the books, but certainly the advocates of the hate crimes law felt that a tough new law was needed.
And it's important, Jim, not only -- not just because of Texas, but because this mirrors the national controversy.
There is pending now in the Congress a national hate crimes law because of James Byrd, because of Matthew Shepard, who was crucified on a split rail fence by bigots, and because of others.
And that law has died in committee also because of the same kind of opposition.
 Absolutely.
 I would support the Orrin Hatch version of it, not the Senator Kennedy version.
But let me say to you, Mr. Vice President, we're happy with our laws on our books.
That bill did -- there was another bill that did die in committee.
But I want to repeat, if you have a state that fully supports the law like we do in Texas, we're going to go after all crime.
And we're going to make sure people get punished for the crime.
And in this case we can't enhance the penalty any more than putting those three thugs to death.
And that's what's gonna happen in the State of Texas.
 I'm not for gay marriage.
I think marriage is a sacred institution between a man and a woman.
And I appreciated the way the administration signed the Defense of Marriage Act.
I presume the Vice President supported it when the President signed that bill and supports it now.
But I think marriage is a sacred institution.
I'm going to be respectful for people who may disagree with me.
I've had a record of doing so in the State of Texas.
I've been a person that had been called a uniter, not a divider, because I accept other people's points of view.
But I feel strongly that marriage should be between a man and a woman.
 I agree with that, and I did support that law.
But I think that we should find a way to allow some kind of civic unions, and I basically agree with Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman.
And I think the three of us have one view and the Governor has another view.
 I'm not sure what kind of view he's describing to me.
I can just tell you, I'm a person who respects other people.
I respect their -- I respect -- on the one hand he says he agrees with me and then he says he doesn't.
I'm not sure where he's coming from.
But I will be a tolerant person.
I've been a tolerant person all my life.
I just happen to believe strongly that marriage is between a man and a woman.
 Yes.
I don't think they ought to have special rights, but I think they ought to have the same rights.
 Well, there's a law pending called the Employment Non-Discrimination Act.
I strongly support it.
What it says is that gays and lesbians can't be fired from their job because they're gay or lesbian.
And it would be a federal law preventing that.
Now, I wonder if the -- it's been blocked by the opponents in the majority in the Congress.
I wonder if the Governor would lend his support to that law.
 The question --
 Well, I have no idea.
I mean, he can throw out all kinds -- I don't know the particulars of this law.
I will tell you I'm the kind of person, I don't hire or fire somebody based upon their sexual orientation.
As a matter of fact, I would like to take the issue a little further.
I don't really think it's any of my -- you know, any of my concerns what -- how you conduct your sex life.
And I think that's a private matter.
And I think that's the way it ought to be.
But I'm going to be respectful for people, I'll tolerate people, and I support equal rights but not special rights for people.
 Well, it would be if they're given special protective status.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't fully enforce laws and fully protect people and fully honor people, which I will do as the President of the United States.
 Jim, I hope that we can come back to the subject of education because the governor made an extensive statement on it and I have a very different view than the one he expressed.
But that having been said, I believe that -- well, first of all, let me say that the governor and I agree on some things where this subject is concerned.
I will not do anything to affect the rights of hunters or sportsmen.
I think that homeowners have to be respected and their right to have a gun if they wish to.
The problem I see is that there are too many guns getting into the hands of children, and criminals, and people who, for whatever reason, some kind of history of stalking or domestic abuse really should not be able to get guns.
I think these assault weapons are a problem.
So I favor closing the gun show loophole.
In fact, I cast the tie-breaking vote to close it, but then the majority in the House of Representatives went the other way.
That's still pending.
If we could get agreement on that, maybe they could pass that in the final days of this Congress.
I think we ought to restore the three-day waiting period under the Brady Law.
I think we should toughen the enforcement of gun laws so that the ones that are already on the books can be enforced much more effectively.
Some of the restrictions that have been placed by the Congress in the last couple of years.
I think -- in the last few years I think have been unfortunate.
I think that we ought to make all schools gun free.
Have a gun-free zone around every school in this country.
I think that measures like these are important.
Child safety trigger locks on a mandatory basis, and others.
 Well, it starts with enforcing law.
When you say loud and clear to somebody if you're going to carry a gun illegally, we're going to arrest you.
If you're going to sell a gun illegally, you need to be arrested.
If you commit a crime with a gun, there needs to be absolute certainty in the law.
And that means that the local law enforcement officials need help at the federal level.
Programs like Project Exile where the federal government intensifies arresting people who illegally use guns.
And we haven't done a very good job of that at the federal level recently.
And I'm going to make it a priority.
Secondly, I don't think we ought to be selling guns to people who shouldn't have them.
That's why I support instant background checks at gun shows.
One of the reasons we have an instant background check is so that we instantly know whether or not somebody should have a gun or not.
In Texas I tried to do something innovative.
There's a lot of talk about trigger locks being on guns sold in the future.
I support that.
But I said if you want a trigger lock to make your gun safe, come and get one for free.
So we're distributing in our State of Texas for free.
I think we ought to raise the age at which a juvenile can carry a handgun from 18 to 21.
I disagree with the vice president on this issue.
He is for registration of guns.
I think the only people that are going to show up to register or get a license -- I guess licensing like a driver's license for a gun, the only people that are going to show up are law-abiding citizens.
The criminal is not going to show up and say hey, give me my I.D.
card.
It's the law-abiding citizens who will do that.
An I don't think that is going to be an effective tool to make the -- keep our society safe.
 Well, I'm not for registration.
I am for licensing by states of new handgun purchases.
 A photo license I.D.
like a driver's license for new handguns and, you know, the Los Angeles --
 Correct.
 The state.
The state.
I think states should do that for new handguns, because too many criminals are getting guns.
There was a recent investigation of the number in Texas who got -- who were given concealed weapons permits in spite of the fact that they had records.
And the "Los Angeles Times" spent a lot of ink going into that.
But I am not for doing anything that would affect hunters or sportsmen, rifles, shotguns, existing handguns.
I do think that sensible gun safety measures are warranted now.
Look, this is the year -- this is in the aftermath of Columbine, and Paducah, and all the places in our country where the nation has been shocked by these weapons in the hands of the wrong people.
The woman who bought the guns for the two boys who did that killing at Columbine said that if she had had to give her name and fill out a form there, she would not have bought those guns.
That conceivably could have prevented that tragedy.
 Well, I'm not for photo licensing.
Let me say something about Columbine.
Listen, we've got gun laws.
He says we ought to have gun-free schools.
Everybody believes that.
I'm sure every state in the union has got them.
You can't carry a gun into a school.
And there ought to be a consequence when you do carry a gun into a school.
But Columbine spoke to a larger issue.
It's really a matter of culture.
It's a culture that somewhere along the line we've begun to disrespect life.
Where a child can walk in and have their heart turned dark as a result of being on the Internet and walk in and decide to take somebody else's life?
So gun laws are important, no question about it, but so is loving children, and character education classes, and faith-based programs being a part of after-school programs.
Some desperate child needs to have somebody put their arm around them and say, we love you.
So there's a -- this is a society that -- of ours that's got to do a better job of teaching children right from wrong.
And we can enforce law.
But there seems to be a lot of preoccupation on -- not certainly only in this debate, but just in general on law.
But there's a larger law.
Love your neighbor like you would like to be loved yourself.
And that's where our society must head if we're going to be a peaceful and prosperous society.
 I also believe in the Golden Rule.
And I agree with a lot of the other things that the governor has said.
We do have a serious problem in our culture.
Tipper and I have worked on the problem of violence in entertainment aimed at children.
She's worked on it longer than I have.
But I feel very strongly about that.
And if I'm elected president, I will do something about that.
But I think that we -- I think we have to start with better parenting.
But I don't think that we can ignore the role played by guns.
I mean, the fact is that there -- even though no state wants them, there are guns in some schools.
And the reason it's so difficult for schools to control that is because in recent years there has been a flood of cheap handguns that are so widely available that kids are finding ways to get ahold of them.
And I think that if you look at the situation as it exists here in the United States compared to any other country in the world, it seems to me pretty obvious that while we respect the rights of hunters and sportsmen, we do need some common sense gun safety steps to stem this flood of guns that are getting into the wrong hands.
 Yeah, no question about that, but there also needs to be strong enforcement of the law.
Some kid who feels like -- doesn't matter where the gun comes from, it could be a cheap gun, expensive gun.
What matters is something in this person's head says there is not going to be a consequence.
So in my state we toughen up the juvenile justice laws.
We added beds.
We're tough.
We believe in tough love.
We say, if you get caught carrying a gun, you're automatically detained.
And that's what needs to happen.
We've got laws.
If laws need to be strengthened, like instant background checks, that's important.
 Well, I've got a plan to do something about that.
It's to make health care affordable and available this way.
First, there's some who should be buying health care who choose not to.
There's some --
 Some of the healthy folks, healthy young kids say I'll never get sick, therefore I don't need health care right now.
For those what I think we need to do is to develop an investment-type vehicle that would be an incentive for them to invest, like medical savings accounts with rollover capacity.
In other words, you say to a youngster, it will be in your financial interest to start saving for future illness, but for the working folks that do want to have health care that can't afford it, a couple of things we need to do.
One, we need more community health centers.
I've developed -- put out money in my budget to expand community health centers all around the country.
These are places where people can get primary care.
Secondly -- and they're good.
They're very important parts of the safety net of health care.
Secondly, that you get a $2,000 rebate from the government if you're a family of $30,000 or less -- it scales down as you get higher -- that you can use to purchase health care in the private markets.
It will be a huge down payment for a pretty darn good system.
If you allow -- also allow -- convince states to -- allow states to allow the mother to match some of the children's health insurance money with it, the pool purchasing power.
And to make health care more affordable, allow business associations like the National Federal of Independent Business or the Chamber of Commerce or the National Restaurant Association to write association plans across jurisdictional lines so that small businesses have got the capacity to have national pooling to drive the cost of insurance down.
I think that's the very best way to go.
It empowers people, it trusts people, it makes -- and it's a practical way to encourage people to purchase health care insurance.
 It's one of my top priorities, Jim, to give every single child in the United States affordable health care within the next four years.
I would like to see eventually in this country some form of universal health care, but I'm not for a government-run system.
In fact, I'm for shrinking the size of government.
I want a smaller and smarter government.
I have been in charge of this reinventing government streamlining project that's reduced the size of government by more than 300,000 people in the last several years.
And the budget plan that I've put out, according to the "Los Angeles Times" again, the way these things are typically measured as a percentage of the GDP, will bring government spending down to the lowest level in 50 years.
So I want to proceed carefully to cover more people.
But I think we should start by greatly expanding the so-called child health insurance or CHIP program to give health insurance to every single child in this country.
I think it's intolerable that we have so many millions of children without any health insurance.
So it's one of my top priorities.
Now, I know that we have some disagreements on this.
And I'm sorry to tell you that, you know, there is a record here.
And Texas ranks 49th out of the 50 states in health care -- in children with health care.
49th for women with health care, and 50th for families with health care.
So it is a priority for me.
I guarantee you.
I'm not aware of any program -- well, I'll just leave it at that.
I think it ought to be a top priority.
 First of all, let me say he's not for a government-run health care system?
I thought that's exactly what he and Mrs. Clinton and them fought for in 1993 was a government-run health care system.
It was fortunately stopped in its tracks.
Secondly, we spend $4.7 billion a year on the uninsured in the State of Texas.
Our rate of uninsured, the percentage of uninsured in Texas has gone down, while the percentage of uninsured in America has gone up.
Our CHIPS program got a late start because our government meets only four months out of every two years, Mr. Vice President.
It may come as a shock for somebody who has been in Washington for so long.
But actually limited government can work in the second largest state in the union.
And therefore Congress passes the bill after our session in 1997 ended, we passed an enabling legislation in 1999.
We've signed up over 110,000 children to the CHIPS program.
For comparable states our size, we're signing them up as fast as any other state.
You can quote all the numbers you want, but I'm telling you we care about our people in Texas.
We spent a lot of money to make sure people get health care in the State of Texas, and we're doing a better job than they are at the national level for reducing uninsured.
 Well, I don't know about all these percentages that he throws out, but I do know that -- I speculate that the reason why he didn't answer your question directly as to whether my numbers were right, the facts were right about Texas ranking dead last in families with health insurance and 49th out of 50 for both children and women, is because those facts are correct.
And as for why it happened, I'm no expert on the Texas procedures, but what my friends there tell me is that the governor opposed a measure put forward by Democrats in the legislature to expand the number of children that would be covered.
And instead directed the money toward a tax cut, a significant part of which went to wealthy interests.
He declared the need for a new tax cut for the oil companies in Texas an emergency need, and so the money was taken away from the CHIP program.
There's -- you don't have to take my word for this.
There is now a federal judge's opinion about the current management of this program ordering the State of Texas to do -- you should read that judge's language about this.
I believe there are 1.4 million children in Texas who do not have health insurance.
600,000 of whom, and maybe some of those have since gotten it, but as of a year ago 600,000 of them were actually eligible for it but they couldn't sign up for it because of the barriers that they had set up.
 If he's trying to allege that I'm a hard-hearted person and I don't care about children, he's absolutely wrong.
We've spent $4.7 billion a year in the State of Texas for uninsured people.
And they get health care.
Now, it's not the most efficient way to get people health care.
But I want to remind you, the number of uninsured in America during their watch has increased.
He can make any excuse he wants, but the facts are that we're reducing the number of uninsured percentage of our population.
And as the percentage of the population is increasing nationally, somehow the allegation that we don't care and we're going to give money for this interest or that interest and not for children in the State of Texas is totally absurd.
Let me just tell you who the jury is.
The people of Texas.
There's only been one governor ever elected to back-to-back four-year terms, and that was me.
And I was able to do so with a lot of Democrat votes, nearly 50% of the Hispanic vote, about 27% of the African-American vote, because people know I'm a conservative person and a compassionate person.
So he can throw all the kinds of numbers around.
I'm just telling you our state comes together to do what is right.
We come together both Republicans and Democrats.
 Yes, yes.
But it's not a statement about his heart.
I don't claim to know his heart.
I think he's a good person.
I make no allegations about that.
I believe him when he says that he has a good heart.
I know enough about your story to admire a lot of the things that you have done as a person.
But I think it's about his priorities.
And let me tell you exactly why I think that the choice he made to give a tax cut for the oil companies and others before addressing this -- I mean, if you were the governor of a state that was dead last in health care for families, and all of a sudden you found yourself with the biggest surplus your state had ever had in its history, wouldn't you want to maybe use some of it to climb from 50th to, say, 45 or 40 or something or maybe better?
I would.
Now, but here is why it's directly relevant, Jim.
Because by his own budget numbers, his proposals for spending on tax cuts for the wealthiest of the wealthy are more than the new spending proposals that he has made for health care and education and national defense all combined.
According to his own numbers.
So it's not a question of his heart, as far as I know.
It's a question of priorities and values.
See, you know --
 First of all, that's simply not true what he just said, of course.
And secondly, I repeat to you --
 That we spent -- the top 1% receive 223 as opposed to 445 billion in new spending.
The top -- let's talk about my tax plan.
The top 1% will pay one-third of all the federal income taxes.
And in return, get one-fifth of the benefits, because most of the tax reductions go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.
That stands in stark contrast, by the way, to a man who is going to leave 50 million -- 50 million Americans out of tax relief.
We just have a different point of view.
It's a totally different point of view.
He believes only the right people ought to get tax relief.
I believe everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief.
Let me go back to Texas, for example, for a minute.
We pay 4.7 billion.
I can't emphasize to you how much.
I signed a bill that puts CHIPS in place.
The bill finally came out at the end of the 1999 session.
We're working hard to sign up children.
We're doing it faster than any other state our size, comparable state.
We're making really good progress.
And our state cares a lot about our children.
My priority is going to be the health of our citizens.
These folks have had eight years to get something done in Washington, D.C. on the uninsured.
They have not done it.
They've had eight years to get something done on Medicare.
And they have not got it done.
And my case to the American people is, if you're happy with inactivity, stay with the horse.
The horse is up here now.
But if you want change, you need to get somebody that knows how to bring Republicans and Democrats together to get positive things done for America.
 I do.
I think that in this 21st century we will soon see the consequences of what's called global warming.
There was a study just a few weeks ago suggesting that in summertime the north polar ice cap will be completely gone in 50 years.
Already many people see the strange weather conditions that the old timers say they've never seen before in their lifetimes.
And what's happening is the level of pollution is increasing significantly.
Now, here is the good news, Jim.
If we take the leadership role and build the new technologies, like the new kinds of cars and trucks that Detroit is itching to build, then we can create millions of good new jobs by being first into the market with these new kinds of cars and trucks and other kinds of technologies.
You know the Japanese are breathing down our necks on this.
They're moving very rapidly because they know that it is a fast-growing world market.
Some of these other countries, particularly in the developing world, their pollution is much worse than anywhere else and their people want higher standards of living.
And so they're looking for ways to satisfy their desire for a better life and still reduce pollution at the same time.
I think that holding onto the old ways and the old argument that the environment and the economy are in conflict is really outdated.
We have to be bold.
We have to provide leadership.
Now it's true that we disagree on this.
The governor said that he doesn't think this problem is necessarily caused by people.
He's for letting the oil companies into the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
Houston has just become the smoggiest city in the country.
And Texas is number one in industrial pollution.
We have a very different outlook.
And I'll tell you this, I will fight for a clean environment in ways that strengthen our economy.
 Well, let me start with Texas.
We are a big industrial state.
We reduced our industrial waste by 11%.
We cleaned up more brown fields than any other administration in my state's history, 450 of them.
Our water is cleaner now.
 A brown field is an abandoned industrial site that just sits idle in some of our urban centers.
And people are willing to invest capital in the brown fields don't want to do so for fear of lawsuit.
I think we ought to have federal liability protection, depending upon whether or not standards have been met.
The book you mentioned that Vice President Gore wrote, he also called for taxing -- big energy taxes in order to clean up the environment.
And now that the energy prices are high, I guess he's not advocating those big energy taxes right now.
I believe we ought to fully fund the Land and Water Conservation Fund to -- with half the money going to states so states can make the right decisions for environmental quality.
I think we need to have clean coal technologies.
I propose $2 billion worth.
By the way, I just found out the other day an interesting fact, that there is a national petroleum reserve right next to -- in Prudhoe Bay that your administration opened up for exploration in that pristine area.
And it was a smart move because there's gas reserves up there.
We need gas pipelines to bring the gas down.
Gas is a clean fuel that we can burn to -- we need to make sure that if we decontrol our plants that there's mandatory -- that the plants must conform to clean air standards, the grandfathered plants, that's what we did in Texas.
No excuses.
You must conform.
In other words, there are practical things we can do.
But it starts with working in a collaborative effort with states and local folks.
If you own the land, every day is Earth Day.
People care a lot about their land and care about their environment.
Not all wisdom is in Washington, D.C. on this issue.
 I'm really strongly committed to clean water and clean air, and cleaning up the new kinds of challenges like global warming.
He is right that I'm not in favor of energy taxes.
I am in favor of tax cuts to encourage and give incentives for the quicker development of these new kinds of technologies.
And let me say again, Detroit is rearing to go on that.
We differ on the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, as I have said.
We differ on whether or not pollution controls ought to be voluntary.
I don't think you can -- I don't think you can get results that way.
We differ on the kinds of appointments that we would make.
 I think it's a fundamental difference.
Let me give you an example.
 Okay, sure.
 Well, I don't believe in command and control out of Washington, D.C.
I believe Washington ought to set standards, but again I think we ought to be collaborative at the local levels and I think we ought to work with people at the local levels.
And by the way, I just want to make sure -- I can't let him just say something and not correct it.
The electric decontrol bill that I fought for and signed in Texas has mandatory emission standards, Mr. Vice President.
That's what we ought to do at the federal level when it comes to grandfathered plants for utilities.
I think there's a difference.
I think, for example, take -- when they took 40 million acres of land out of circulation without consulting local officials, I thought that was --
 Out in the west, yeah.
And so -- on the logging issue.
That's not the way I would have done it.
Perhaps some of that land needs to be set aside.
But I certainly would have consulted with governors and elected officials before I would have acted unilaterally.
 Sure, absolutely, so long as they're based upon science and they're reasonable.
So long as people have input.
 I think it's an issue that we need to take very seriously.
But I don't think we know the solution to global warming yet.
And I don't think we've got all the facts before we make decisions.
I tell you one thing I'm not going to do is I'm not going to let the United States carry the burden for cleaning up the world's air.
Like Kyoto Treaty would have done.
China and India were exempted from that treaty.
I think we need to be more even-handed, as evidently 99 senators -- I think it was 99 senators supported that position.
 99 to nothing.
 Well, that vote wasn't exactly -- a lot of the supporters of the Kyoto Treaty actually ended up voting for that because the way it was worded.
But there's no doubt there's a lot of opposition to it in the Senate.
I'm not for command and control techniques either.
I'm for working with the groups, not just with industry but also with the citizen groups and local communities to control sprawl in ways that the local communities themselves come up with.
But I disagree that we don't know the cause of global warming.
I think that we do.
It's pollution, carbon dioxide, and other chemicals that are even more potent, but in smaller quantities, that cause this.
Look, the world's temperature is going up, weather patterns are changing, storms are getting more violent and unpredictable.
What are we going to tell our children?
I'm a grandfather now.
I want to be able to tell my grandson when I'm in my later years that I didn't turn away from the evidence that showed that we were doing some serious harm.
In my faith tradition, it is -- it's written in the book of Matthew, "Where your heart is, there is your treasure also."
And I believe that -- that we ought to recognize the value to our children and grandchildren of taking steps that preserve the environment in a way that's good for them.
 Yeah, I agree.
I just -- I think there has been -- some of the scientists, I believe, Mr. Vice President, haven't they been changing their opinion a little bit on global warming?
A profound scientist recently made a different --
 I've been trying so hard not to.
 Twice.
 That's an interruption, by the way.
 I'm sorry.
I apologize, Mr. Vice President.
 Of course they care about them.
Oh, you mean the rules.
 What the heck.
I -- of course there's a lot -- look, global warming needs to be taken very seriously, and I take it seriously.
But science, there's a lot -- there's differing opinions.
And before we react, I think it's best to have the full accounting, full understanding of what's taking place.
And I think to answer your question, I think both of us care a lot about the environment.
We may have different approaches.
We may have different approaches in terms of how we deal with local folks.
I just cited an example of the administration just unilaterally acting without any input.
And I remember you gave a very good answer to New Hampshire about the White Mountains, about how it was important to keep that collaborative effort in place.
I feel very strongly the same place.
It certainly wasn't the attitude that took place out west, however.
 Well, we all make mistakes.
I've been known to mangle a syl-a-ble or two myself, you know, if you know what I mean.
I think credibility is important.
It is going to be important for the president to be credible with Congress, important for the president to be credible with foreign nations.
And yes, I think it's something that people need to consider.
This isn't something new.
I read a report, or a memo, from somebody in his 1988 campaign -- I forgot the fellow's name -- warning then Senator Gore to be careful about exaggerating claims.
I thought during his debate with Senator Bradley saying he authored the EITC when it didn't happen.
I mention the last debate --
 The Earned Income Tax Credit, sorry.
 A lot of initials from a guy who's not from Washington, isn't it?
Anyway, he co-sponsored McCain-Feingold, and yet he didn't.
And so I think this is an issue.
I found it to be an issue in trying to defend my tax relief package.
I thought there was some exaggerations about the numbers.
But the people are going to have to make up their mind on this issue.
And I am going to continue to defend my record and defend my propositions against what I think are exaggerations.
Exaggerations like, for example, only 5% of seniors receive benefits under my Medicare reform package.
That's what he said the other day, and that's simply not the case.
And I have every right in the world to defend my record and positions.
That's what debates are about and that's what campaigns are about.
 I got some of the details wrong last week in some of the examples that I used, Jim, and I'm sorry about that.
And I'm going to try to do better.
One of the reasons I regret it is that getting a detail wrong interfered several times with the point that I was trying to make.
However many days that young girl in Florida stood in her classroom, however long, even if it was only one day, doesn't change the fact that there are a lot of overcrowded classrooms in America and we need to do something about that.
There are seniors who pay more for their prescriptions than a lot of other people, more than their pets, sometimes.
More sometimes than people in foreign countries.
And we need to do something about that.
Not with the measure that leaves the majority of them without any real basic help until the next president's term of four years is over.
But right away.
And that means doing it under the Medicare program.
I can't promise that I will never get another detail wrong.
I can promise you that I will try not to, and hard.
But I will promise you this with all the confidence in my heart and in the world, that I will do my best if I'm elected president, I'll work my heart out to get the big things right for the American people.
 That's going to be up to the people, isn't it?
 Depends on what he says in the future in the campaign.
 I hope they're not awful things.
I think they may be using the man's own words.
 I don't believe I've used those words.
 Maybe they have.
 Wait a minute.
(LAUGHTER)
 I don't use language like that and I don't think that we should.
 I understand.
The -- I haven't seen that, in my commercials?
 You haven't seen the commercial?
 I think that what -- I think the point of that is that anybody would have a hard time trying to make a tax cut plan that is so large, that would put us into such big deficits, that gives almost half the benefits to the wealthiest of the wealthy.
I think anybody would have a hard time explaining that clearly in a way that makes sense to the average person.
 That's the kind of exaggeration I was just talking about.
(LAUGHTER)
 Well, I wasn't the one having trouble explaining it.
 Jim, one of the issues that I would like to close with in my statement is education, because it's an example of the overall approach that I think is important.
This race is about values, it's about change, it's about giving choices to the American people.
And education is my number one priority, because I think that it's the most important big major change that we can bring in our country.
I agree with Governor Bush that we should have new accountability, testing of students.
I think that we should require states to test all students, test schools and school districts, and I think that we should go further and require teacher testing for new teachers also.
The difference is that while my plan starts with new accountability and maintains local control, it doesn't stop there.
Because I want to give new choices to parents.
To send their kids to college with a $10,000 tax deduction for college tuition per child per year.
I want to reduce the size of the classrooms in this country.
For one basic reason, so that students can get more one-on-one time with teachers.
And the way to do that is first to recruit more teachers.
I've a plan in my budget to recruit 100,000 new, highly qualified teachers and to help local school districts build new schools.
I think that we have to put more emphasis on early learning and pre-school.
Now, here is how that connects with all the rest of what we've been talking about.
If you have -- if you squander the surplus on a huge tax cut that goes mostly to those at the top, then you can't make education the top priority.
If the tax cut is your number one, two, three and four priority, you can't do education.
You can't do both.
You have to choose.
I choose education and health care, the environment and retirement security, and I ask for your support.
 Jim, thank you very much.
Mr. Vice President, thank you very much, and I would like to thank the folks here at Wake Forest, and I want to thank you all for listening.
I'm running to get some things done for America.
There's too many issues left unresolved.
There's been too much finger pointing and too much name calling in Washington, D.C.
I would like to unite this country to get an agenda done that will speak to the hopes and aspirations of the future.
I want to have an education system that sets high standards, local control of schools and strong accountability.
No child should be left behind in America.
I want to make sure we rebuild our military to keep the peace.
I worry about morale in today's military.
The warning signs are clear.
It is time to have a new commander in chief who will rebuild the military, pay our men and women more, make sure they're housed better and have a focused mission for our military.
Once and for all, I want to do something about Medicare.
This issue has been too long on the table because it's been a political issue.
It's time to bring folks together to say that all seniors will get prescription drug coverage.
I want to do something about Social Security.
It's an important priority, because now is the time to act and we're going to say to our seniors, our promises we've made to you will be promises kept.
But younger workers, in order to make sure the system exists tomorrow, younger workers ought to be able to take some of your own money and invest it in safe securities to get a better rate of return on that money.
And finally, I do believe in tax relief.
I believe we can set our priorities.
I don't believe, like the vice president does, in huge government.
I believe in limited government.
By having a limited government and a focused government, we can send some of the money back to the people who pay the bills.
I want to have tax relief for all people who pay the bills in America, because I think you can spend your money more wisely than the federal government can.
Thank you for listening.
I'm asking for your vote, and God bless.
 Yes, I certainly do.
 Charlie, thank you, and thank our panelists.
 Each situation is different, Robin.
 Robin, I'm going to answer your question.
 (OFF-MIKE)
 You remember the last debate?
 The goal of the sanctions was not to remove Saddam Hussein, it was to remove the weapons of mass destruction.
And, Mr. President, just yesterday the Duelfer report told you and the whole world they worked.
He didn't have weapons of mass destruction, Mr. President.
That was the objective.
 Anthony, I would not.
I have laid out a different plan, because the president's plan is not working.
You see that every night on television.
 Two days ago in the Oval Office, I met with the finance minister from Iraq.
He came to see me.
And he talked about how optimistic he was and the country was about heading toward elections.
 Yes, sir, please.
 First of all, we didn't find out he didn't have weapons until we got there, and my opponent thought he had weapons and told everybody he thought he had weapons.
 No, I appreciate that.
I -- listen, I -- we've got a great country.
I love our values.
And I recognize I've made some decisions that have caused people to not understand the great values of our country.
 Nikki, that's a question that's been raised by a lot of people around the country.
 I remember sitting in the White House looking at those generals, saying, "Do you have what you need in this war?
Do you have what it takes?"
 You rely on good military people to execute the military component of the strategy, but winning the peace is larger than just the military component.
 Is it Randee?
 I don't think you can just rely on U.N. sanctions, Randee.
But you're absolutely correct, it is a threat, it's a huge threat.
 That answer almost made me want to scowl.
 Yes, that's a great question.
Thanks.
 Daniel, I don't support a draft.
 Let me just -- I've got to answer this.
 Let me answer what he just said, about around the world.
 You tell Tony Blair we're going alone.
Tell Tony Blair we're going alone.
Tell Silvio Berlusconi we're going alone.
Tell Aleksander Kwasniewski of Poland we're going alone.
 Mr. President, countries are leaving the coalition, not joining.
Eight countries have left it.
 Thank you very much, Ann.
 That's an odd thing to say, since we've tripled the homeland security budget from $10 billion to $30 billion.
 Well, the president and his experts have told America that it's not a question of if; it's a question of when.
And I accept what the president has said.
These terrorists are serious, they're deadly, and they know nothing except trying to kill.
 Well, we'll talk about the tax cut for middle class here in a minute.
But yes, I'm worried.
I'm worried.
I'm worried about our country.
And all I can tell you is every day I know that there's people working overtime, doing the very best they can.
And the reason I'm worried is because there's a vicious enemy that has an ideology of hate.
 I haven't yet.
Just want to make sure they're safe.
When a drug comes in from Canada, I want to make sure it cures you and doesn't kill you.
 John, you heard the president just say that he thought he might try to be for it.
 If they're safe, they're coming.
I want to remind you that it wasn't just my administration that made the decision on safety.
President Clinton did the same thing, because we have an obligation to protect you.
 Actually, Mr. President, in 1997 we fixed Medicare, and I was one of the people involved in it.
 Very easily.
John Edwards is the author of the Patients' Bill of Rights.
He wanted to give people rights.
John Edwards and I support tort reform.
We both believe that, as lawyers -- I'm a lawyer, too.
And I believe that we will be able to get a fix that has alluded everybody else because we know how to do it.
 Let me see where to start here.
 A follow-up...
 Yes, I think we should look at the punitive and we should have some limitations.
 You're right, what does matter is a plan.
He said he's for -- you're now for capping punitive damages?
 Right, thank you for that.
 Let me begin by saying that my health-care plan is not what the president described.
It is not a government takeover.
 Well, look at the budget.
One is make sure Congress doesn't overspend.
 After 9/11, after the recession had ended, the president asked for another tax cut and promised 5.6 million jobs would be created.
He lost 1.6 million, ladies and gentlemen.
And most of that tax cut went to the wealthiest people in the country.
 Absolutely.
Yes.
Right into the camera.
Yes.
I am not going to raise taxes.
 He's just not credible when he talks about being fiscally conservative.
He's just not credible.
If you look at his record in the Senate, he voted to break the caps -- the spending caps -- over 200 times.
 Good.
You looked at me like my clock was up.
 Well, first of all, the president's figures of $2.2 trillion just aren't accurate.
Those are the fuzzy math figures put together by some group that works for the campaign.
That's not the number.
 Yes, I mean, he's got a record.
It's been there for 20 years.
You can run, but you can't hide.
He voted 98 times to raise taxes.
I mean, these aren't make-up figures.
 Off-road diesel engines -- we have reached an agreement to reduce pollution from off-road diesel engines by 90 percent.
 Boy, to listen to that -- the president, I don't think, is living in a world of reality with respect to the environment.
 Well, had we joined the Kyoto treaty, which I guess he's referring to, it would have cost America a lot of jobs.
 The fact is that the Kyoto treaty was flawed.
I was in Kyoto, and I was part of that.
I know what happened.
But this president didn't try to fix it.
He just declared it dead, ladies and gentlemen, and we walked away from the work of 160 nations over 10 years.
 Jane, there are a lot of ways to be competitive.
And unfortunately again I regret this administration has not seized them and embraced them.
Let me give you an example.
 Let me start with how to control the cost of health care: medical liability reform, for starters, which he's opposed.
 You can't stop all outsourcing, Charlie.
I've never promised that.
I'm not going to, because that would be pandering.
You can't.
 I own a timber company?
 I appreciate that.
 Former Governor Racicot, as chairman of the Republican Party, said he thought that the Patriot Act has to be changed and fixed.
 You know, Elizabeth, I really respect your -- the feeling that's in your question.
I understand it.
I know the morality that's prompting that question, and I respect it enormously.
 Embryonic stem-cell research requires the destruction of life to create a stem cell.
I'm the first president ever to allow funding -- federal funding -- for embryonic stem-cell research.
I did to because I too hope that we'll discover cures from the stem cells and from the research derived.
 Well, you talk about walking a waffle line -- he says he's allowed it, which means he's going to allow the destruction of life up to a certain amount and then he isn't going to allow it.
 Let me make sure you understand my decision.
Those stem- cells lines already existed.
The embryo had already been destroyed prior to my decision.
 I'm not telling.
 Thank you, Charlie.
 I would say to that person exactly what I will say to you right now.
 I'm trying to decipher that.
 Well, again, the president just said, categorically, my opponent is against this, my opponent is against that.
You know, it's just not that simple.
No, I'm not.
 Well, it's pretty simple when they say: Are you for a ban on partial birth abortion?
Yes or no?
 Put a head fake on us.
 Hi, Linda.
 I have made a lot of decisions, and some of them little, like appointments to boards you never heard of, and some of them big.
 But history will look back, and I'm fully prepared to accept any mistakes that history judges to my administration, because the president makes the decisions, the president has to take the responsibility.
 I believe the president made a huge mistake, a catastrophic mistake, not to live up to his own standard, which was: build a true global coalition, give the inspectors time to finish their job and go through the U.N. process to its end and go to war as a last resort.
 He complains about the fact our troops don't have adequate equipment, yet he voted against the $87 billion supplemental I sent to the Congress and then issued one of the most amazing quotes in political history: "I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it."
 Not necessarily be in power, but here's what I'll say about the $87 billion.
 Do you want to go first?
 Either way.
 Thank you.
 Thank you, all of you, for taking part.
 Charlie, thanks.
 Well, Alan (ph), thank you very much for the question.
I want to first, obviously, thank Belmont University, Tom, thank you, and to all of you who are participating tonight and those of you who sent e-mail questions in.
 Now, step one was a rescue package that was passed last week.
We've got to make sure that works properly.
And that means strong oversight, making sure that investors, taxpayers are getting their money back and treated as investors.
 Well, thank you, Tom.
Thank you, Belmont University.
And Senator Obama, it's good to be with you at a town hall meeting.
 Not you, Tom.
 You know, that's a tough question and there's a lot of qualified Americans.
But I think the first criteria, Tom, would have to be somebody who immediately Americans identify with, immediately say, we can trust that individual.
 Well, Warren would be a pretty good choice -- Warren Buffett, and I'm pleased to have his support.
But there are other folks out there.
The key is making sure that the next treasury secretary understands that it's not enough just to help those at the top.
 And we've -- you know, Senator McCain and I have some fundamental disagreements on the economy, starting with Senator McCain's statement earlier that he thought the fundamentals of the economy were sound.
 Well, thank you, Oliver, and that's an excellent question, because as you just described it, bailout, when I believe that it's rescue, because -- because of the greed and excess in Washington and Wall Street, Main Street was paying a very heavy price, and we know that.
 Well, Oliver, first, let me tell you what's in the rescue package for you.
Right now, the credit markets are frozen up and what that means, as a practical matter, is that small businesses and some large businesses just can't get loans.
 And Senator McCain during that period said that we should keep on deregulating because that's how the free enterprise system works.
 No, I am confident about the American economy.
But we are going to have to have some leadership from Washington that not only sets out much better regulations for the financial system.
 I think it depends on what we do.
I think if we act effectively, if we stabilize the housing market -- which I believe we can, if we go out and buy up these bad loans, so that people can have a new mortgage at the new value of their home -- I think if we get rid of the cronyism and special interest influence in Washington so we can act more effectively.
 Well, look, I understand your frustration and your cynicism, because while you've been carrying out your responsibilities -- most of the people here, you've got a family budget.
If less money is coming in, you end up making cuts.
Maybe you don't go out to dinner as much.
Maybe you put off buying a new car.
 You know, you may have seen your health care premiums go up.
We've got to reform health care to help you and your budget.
 Well, Theresa (ph), thank you.
And I can see why you feel that cynicism and mistrust, because the system in Washington is broken.
And I have been a consistent reformer.
 The three priorities were health...
 I think you can work on all three at once, Tom.
I think it's very important that we reform our entitlement programs.
 My friends, some of this $700 billion ends up in the hands of terrorist organizations.
 We're going to have to prioritize, just like a family has to prioritize.
Now, I've listed the things that I think have to be at the top of the list.
 Well, Fiora (ph), I'm going to ask the American people to understand that there are some programs that we may have to eliminate.
 Look, we can attack health care and energy at the same time.
We're not -- we're not -- we're not rifle shots here.
We are Americans.
We can, with the participation of all Americans, work together and solve these problems together.
 You know, a lot of you remember the tragedy of 9/11 and where you were on that day and, you know, how all of the country was ready to come together and make enormous changes to make us not only safer, but to make us a better country and a more unified country.
 Well, I think it starts with Washington.
We've got to show that we've got good habits, because if we're running up trillion dollar debts that we're passing on to the next generation, then a lot of people are going to think, "Well, you know what?
There's easy money out there."
 I want to use a scalpel so that people who need help are getting help and those of us, like myself and Senator McCain, who don't need help, aren't getting it.
 Well, you know, nailing down Senator Obama's various tax proposals is like nailing Jell-O to the wall.
There has been five or six of them and if you wait long enough, there will probably be another one.
 Tom, can I respond to this briefly?
Because...
 The tax issue, because I think it's very important.
Go ahead.
 Well, Tom, we're going to have to take on entitlements and I think we've got to do it quickly.
We're going to have a lot of work to do, so I can't guarantee that we're going to do it in the next two years, but I'd like to do in the my first term as president.
 Now, if we get our tax policies right so that they're good for the middle class, if we reverse the policies of the last eight years that got us into this fix in the first place and that Senator McCain supported, then we are going to be in a position to deal with Social Security and deal with Medicare, because we will have a health care plan that actually works for you, reduces spending and costs over the long term, and Social Security that is stable and solvent for all Americans and not just some.
 Sure.
Hey, I'll answer the question.
Look -- look, it's not that hard to fix Social Security, Tom.
It's just...
 ... tough decisions.
I want to get to Medicare in a second.
 Well, thank you.
Look, we are in tough economic times; we all know that.
And let's keep -- never forget the struggle that Americans are in today.
 This is one of the biggest challenges of our times.
 And it is absolutely critical that we understand this is not just a challenge, it's an opportunity, because if we create a new energy economy, we can create five million new jobs, easily, here in the United States.
 I'm just trying to keep up with John.
 Tom, wave like that and I'll look at you.
 Sure.
 I think pure research and development investment on the part of the United States government is certainly appropriate.
I think once it gets into productive stages, that we ought to, obviously, turn it over to the private sector.
 Well, you know, as I travel around the country, this is one of the single most frequently asked issues that I get, is the issue of health care.
It is breaking family budgets.
I can't tell you how many people I meet who don't have health insurance.
 Well, thank you for the question.
You really identified one of the really major challenges that America faces.
Co-payments go up, costs go up, skyrocketing costs, which make people less and less able to afford health insurance in America.
 I think it's a responsibility, in this respect, in that we should have available and affordable health care to every American citizen, to every family member.
And with the plan that -- that I have, that will do that.
 Well, why don't -- why don't -- let's talk about this, Tom, because there was just a lot of stuff out there.
 Well, I think it should be a right for every American.
In a country as wealthy as ours, for us to have people who are going bankrupt because they can't pay their medical bills -- for my mother to die of cancer at the age of 53 and have to spend the last months of her life in the hospital room arguing with insurance companies because they're saying that this may be a pre-existing condition and they don't have to pay her treatment, there's something fundamentally wrong about that.
 I don't believe that -- did we hear the size of the fine?
 Well, I thank you for that question, because there's no doubt that history shows us that nations that are strong militarily over time have to have a strong economy, as well.
And that is one of the challenges that America faces.
 So we are peacemakers and we're peacekeepers.
But the challenge is to know when the United States of American can beneficially effect the outcome of a crisis, when to go in and when not, when American military power is worth the expenditure of our most precious treasure.
 Well, you know, Senator McCain, in the last debate and today, again, suggested that I don't understand.
It's true.
There are some things I don't understand.
 Well, we may not always have national security issues at stake, but we have moral issues at stake.
 And so I do believe that we have to consider it as part of our interests, our national interests, in intervening where possible.
 Well, let me just follow up, my friends.
If we had done what Senator Obama wanted done in Iraq, and that was set a date for withdrawal, which General Petraeus, our chief -- chairman of our Joint Chiefs of Staff said would be a very dangerous course to take for America, then we would have had a wider war, we would have been back, Iranian influence would have increased, al Qaeda would have re- established a base.
 Katie, it's a terrific question and we have a difficult situation in Pakistan.
I believe that part of the reason we have a difficult situation is because we made a bad judgment going into Iraq in the first place when we hadn't finished the job of hunting down bin Laden and crushing al Qaeda.
 What I've said is we're going to encourage democracy in Pakistan, expand our nonmilitary aid to Pakistan so that they have more of a stake in working with us, but insisting that they go after these militants.
 Well, Katie (ph), thank you.
 Tom, just a...
 ... just a quick follow-up on this.
I think...
 If we're going to have follow-ups, then I will want follow-ups, as well.
 It'd be fine with me.
It'd be fine with me.
 Then let's have one.
 It'd be fine with me.
 Just -- just -- just a quick follow-up, because I think -- I think this is important.
 You're doing a great job, Tom.
 Thank you very much.
 Senator McCain, this is the guy who sang, "Bomb, bomb, bomb Iran," who called for the annihilation of North Korea.
That I don't think is an example of "speaking softly."
 And, Tom, if -- if we're going to go back and forth, I then -- I'd like to have equal time to go -- to respond to...
 ... to -- to -- to...
 Not true.
Not true.
I have, obviously, supported those efforts that the United States had to go in militarily and I have opposed that I didn't think so.
 I'll be very brief.
We are going to have to make the Iraqi government start taking more responsibility, withdraw our troops in a responsible way over time, because we're going to have to put some additional troops in Afghanistan.
 General Petraeus has just taken over a position of responsibility, where he has the command and will really set the tone for the strategy and tactics that are used.
 First of all, as I say, I don't think that -- we're not going to have another Cold War with Russia.
 We've got to show moral support for Ukraine.
We've got to advocate for their membership in NATO.
 It will not be a re-ignition of the Cold War, but Russia is a challenge.
 Well, the resurgence of Russia is one of the central issues that we're going to have to deal with in the next presidency.
And for the most part I agree with Senator McCain on many of the steps that have to be taken.
 I think they've engaged in an evil behavior and I think that it is important that we understand they're not the old Soviet Union but they still have nationalist impulses that I think are very dangerous.
 Maybe.
 Depends on how we respond to Russia and it depends on a lot of things.
If I say yes, then that means that we're reigniting the old Cold War.
If I say no, it ignores their behavior.
 Well, thank you, Terry (ph).
And thank you for your service to the country.
 Well, Terry, first of all, we honor your service, and we're grateful for it.
 My wife, Michelle, is there and she could give you a much longer list than I do.
And most of the time, I learn it by asking her.
 Well, thank you, Tom.
And I think what I don't know is what all of us don't know, and that's what's going to happen both here at home and abroad.
 Thank you, Jeremy.
I appreciate your -- your question, and thank you for being here this evening and to all of those from Nassau County that have come, thank you for your time.
Thank you to Hofstra University and to Candy Crowley for organizing and leading this -- this event.
 And also make sure that when they get out of college, there's a job.
When I was governor of Massachusetts, to get a high school degree, you had to pass an exam.
If you graduated in the top quarter of your airlines, we gave you a John and Abigail Adams scholarship, four years tuition free in the college of your choice in Massachusetts, it's a public institution.
 2014.
When you come out in 2014, I presume I'm going to be president.
I'm going to make sure you get a job.
Thanks Jeremy.
Yeah, you bet.
 Jeremy, first of all, your future is bright.
And the fact that you're making an investment in higher education is critical.
Not just to you, but to the entire nation.
Now, the most important thing we can do is to make sure that we are creating jobs in this country.
But not just jobs, good paying jobs.
Ones that can support a family.
 And what I want to do, is build on the five million jobs that we've created over the last 30 months in the private sector alone.
And there are a bunch of things we can do to make sure your future is bright.
 Well what you're seeing in this country is 23 million people struggling to find a job.
And a lot of them, as you say, Candy, have been out of work for a long, long, long time.
The president's policies have been exercised over the last four years and they haven't put Americans back to work.
 Candy, what Governor Romney said just isn't true.
He wanted to take them into bankruptcy without providing them any way to stay open.
And we would have lost a million jobs.
And that -- don't take my word for it, take the executives at GM and Chrysler, some of whom are Republicans, may even support Governor Romney.
But they'll tell you his prescription wasn't going to work.
 That -- that Detroit -- that Detroit answer...
 ... that Detroit answer...
 ... and the rest of the answer, way off the mark.
 The most important thing we can do is to make sure we control our own energy.
So here's what I've done since I've been president.
We have increased oil production to the highest levels in 16 years.
 Well, let's look at the president's policies, all right, as opposed to the rhetoric, because we've had four years of policies being played out.
And the president's right in terms of the additional oil production, but none of it came on federal land.
As a matter of fact, oil production is down 14 percent this year on federal land, and gas production was down 9 percent.
Why?
Because the president cut in half the number of licenses and permits for drilling on federal lands, and in federal waters.
 Candy, there's no doubt that world demand's gone up, but our production is going up, and we're using oil more efficiently.
And very little of what Governor Romney just said is true.
We've opened up public lands.
We're actually drilling more on public lands than in the previous administration and my -- the previous president was an oil man.
 That's the strategy you need, an all-of-the-above strategy, and that's what we're going to do in the next four years.
 But that's not what you've done in the last four years.
That's the problem.
In the last four years, you cut permits and licenses on federal land and federal waters in half.
 Not true, Governor Romney.
 So how much did you cut (inaudible)?
 Not true.
 How much did you cut them by, then?
 Governor, we have actually produced more oil --
 No, no.
How much did you cut licenses and permits on federal land and federal waters?
 Governor Romney, here's what we did.
There were a whole bunch of oil companies.
 No, no, I had a question and the question was how much did you cut them by?
 You want me to answer a question --
 How much did you cut them by?
 I'm happy to answer the question.
 All right.
And it is --
 Here's what happened.
You had a whole bunch of oil companies who had leases on public lands that they weren't using.
So what we said was you can't just sit on this for 10, 20, 30 years, decide when you want to drill, when you want to produce, when it's most profitable for you.
These are public lands.
So if you want to drill on public lands, you use it or you lose it.
 OK, (inaudible) --
 And so what we did was take away those leases.
And we are now reletting them so that we can actually make a profit.
 And production on private -- on government land --
 Production is up.
 -- is down.
 No, it isn't.
 Production on government land of oil is down 14 percent.
 Governor --
 And production on gas --
 It's just not true.
 It's absolutely true.
Look, there's no question but the people recognize that we have not produced more (inaudible) on federal lands and in federal waters.
And coal, coal production is not up; coal jobs are not up.
 Well --
 And the answer is I don't believe people think that's the case --
 -- (inaudible).
 That wasn't the question.
 OK.
 That was a statement.
I don't think the American people believe that.
I will fight for oil, coal and natural gas.
And the proof, the proof of whether a strategy is working or not is what the price is that you're paying at the pump.
If you're paying less than you paid a year or two ago, why, then, the strategy is working.
But you're paying more.
When the president took office, the price of gasoline here in Nassau County was about $1.86 a gallon.
Now, it's $4.00 a gallon.
The price of electricity is up.
 Well, think about what the governor -- think about what the governor just said.
He said when I took office, the price of gasoline was $1.80, $1.86.
Why is that?
Because the economy was on the verge of collapse, because we were about to go through the worst recession since the Great Depression, as a consequence of some of the same policies that Governor Romney's now promoting.
 He gets the first --
 He actually got --
 He actually got the first question.
So I get the last question -- last answer --
 Candy, Candy --
 Candy, I don't have a policy of stopping wind jobs in Iowa and that -- they're not phantom jobs.
They're real jobs.
 I appreciate wind jobs in Iowa and across our country.
I appreciate the jobs in coal and oil and gas.
I'm going to make sure --
 -- we're taking advantage of our energy resources.
We'll bring back manufacturing to America.
We're going to get through a very aggressive energy policy, 31/2 million more jobs in this country.
It's critical to our future.
 Candy, it's not going to --
 Used to being interrupted.
 Hi, Mary.
 You're doing great.
 Thank you very much.
And let me tell you, you're absolutely right about part of that, which is I want to bring the rates down, I want to simplify the tax code, and I want to get middle- income taxpayers to have lower taxes.
 My philosophy on taxes has been simple.
And that is, I want to give middle-class families and folks who are striving to get into the middle-class some relief.
Because they have been hit hard over the last decade.
Over the last 15, over the last 20 years.
 You're absolutely right.
 No, it's not settled.
 I -- I...
 Well of course they add up.
I -- I was -- I was someone who ran businesses for 25 years, and balanced the budget.
I ran the Olympics and balanced the budget.
I ran the -- the state of Massachusetts as a governor, to the extent any governor does, and balanced the budget all four years.
When we're talking about math that doesn't add up, how about $4 trillion of deficits over the last four years, $5 trillion?
That's math that doesn't add up.
We have -- we have a president talking about someone's plan in a way that's completely foreign to what my real plan is.
 And then we have his own record, which is we have four consecutive years where he said when he was running for office, he would cut the deficit in half.
Instead he's doubled it.
We've gone from $10 trillion of national debt, to $16 trillion of national debt.
If the president were reelected, we'd go to almost $20 trillion of national debt.
This puts us on a road to Greece.
I know what it takes to balance budgets.
I've done it my entire life.
So for instance when he says, "Yours is a $5 trillion cut."
Well, no it's not.
Because I'm offsetting some of the reductions with holding down some of the deductions.
 And I just described -- I just described to you, Mr. President -- I just described to you precisely how I'd do it which is with a single number that people can put -- and they can put they're -- they're deductions and credits...
 Great.
Looking forward to it.
 Well, Katherine, that's a great question.
And, you know, I was raised by a single mom who had to put herself through school while looking after two kids.
And she worked hard every day and made a lot of sacrifices to make sure we got everything we needed.
My grandmother, she started off as a secretary in a bank.
She never got a college education, even though she was smart as a whip.
And she worked her way up to become a vice president of a local bank, but she hit the glass ceiling.
She trained people who would end up becoming her bosses during the course of her career.
 Thank you.
And important topic, and one which I learned a great deal about, particularly as I was serving as governor of my state, because I had the chance to pull together a cabinet and all the applicants seemed to be men.
 And -- and so we -- we took a concerted effort to go out and find women who had backgrounds that could be qualified to become members of our cabinet.
 I'm going to help women in America get good work by getting a stronger economy and by supporting women in the workforce.
 Katherine, I just want to point out that when Governor Romney's campaign was asked about the Lilly Ledbetter bill, whether he supported it?
He said, "I'll get back to you."
And that's not the kind of advocacy that women need in any economy.
Now, there are some other issues that have a bearing on how women succeed in the workplace.
For example, their healthcare.
You know a major difference in this campaign is that Governor Romney feels comfortable having politicians in Washington decide the health care choices that women are making.
 And I've got two daughters and I want to make sure that they have the same opportunities that anybody's sons have.
That's part of what I'm fighting for as president of the United States.
 Thank you.
And I appreciate that question.
 I don't think so, Candy.
 ...
I don't believe...
 I want to make sure our timekeepers are working here.
 The time -- the time...
 I'd just note that I don't believe that bureaucrats in Washington should tell someone whether they can use contraceptives or not.
And I don't believe employers should tell someone whether they could have contraceptive care of not.
Every woman in America should have access to contraceptives.
And -- and the -- and the president's statement of my policy is completely and totally wrong.
 Governor...
 Let me come back and -- and answer your question.
 Well, first of all, I think it's important to tell you that we did come in during some tough times.
We were losing 800,000 jobs a month when I started.
But we had been digging our way out of policies that were misplaced and focused on the top doing very well and middle class folks not doing well.
 Well, we've gone through a tough four years.
There's no doubt about it.
But four years ago, I told the American people and I told you I would cut taxes for middle class families.
And I did.
I told you I'd cut taxes for small businesses, and I have.
 I said that we would put in place health care reform to make sure that insurance companies can't jerk you around and if you don't have health insurance, that you'd have a chance to get affordable insurance, and I have.
 ...the choice in this election is going to be whose promises are going to be more likely to help you in your life?
Make sure your kids can go to college.
Make sure that you are getting a good paying job, making sure that Medicare and Social Security... (CROSSTALK)
 ...will be there for you.
 I think you know better.
I think you know that these last four years haven't been so good as the president just described and that you don't feel like your confident that the next four years are going to be much better either.
 The middle class is getting crushed under the policies of a president who has not understood what it takes to get the economy working again.
He keeps saying, "Look, I've created 5 million jobs."
That's after losing 5 million jobs.
The entire record is such that the unemployment has not been reduced in this country.
The unemployment, the number of people who are still looking for work, is still 23 million Americans.
 This is for Governor Romney?
 Is it Loraina?
 Lorraine?
 Lorraine.
 Good, thanks.
 Thank you.
Lorraine?
Did I get that right?
Good.
Thank you for your question.
And let me step back and tell you what I would like to do with our immigration policy broadly and include an answer to your question.
 Now when the president ran for office, he said that he'd put in place, in his first year, a piece of legislation -- he'd file a bill in his first year that would reform our -- our immigration system, protect legal immigration, stop illegal immigration.
He didn't do it.
 Good, I look forward to it.
 Yes.
 No, let -- let -- let me go back and speak to the points that the president made and -- and -- and let's get them correct.
 Let me mention something else the president said.
It was a moment ago and I didn't get a chance to, when he was describing Chinese investments and so forth.
 Candy?
 Mr. President, I'm still speaking.
 Mr. President, let me finish.
 I've gotta continue.
 Just going to make a point.
Any investments I have over the last eight years have been managed by a blind trust.
And I understand they do include investments outside the United States, including in -- in Chinese companies.
 I've got to say...
 Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?
 You know, I -- I don't look at my pension.
It's not as big as yours so it doesn't take as long.
 Well, let me give you some advice.
 I don't check it that often.
 Let me give you some advice.
Look at your pension.
You also have investments in Chinese companies.
You also have investments outside the United States.
You also have investments through a Cayman's trust.
 I thought we were talking about immigration.
 I do want to make sure that...
 I do want to make sure that -- I do want to make sure that we just understand something.
Governor Romney says he wasn't referring to Arizona as a model for the nation.
His top adviser on immigration is the guy who designed the Arizona law, the entirety of it; not E-Verify, the whole thing.
That's his policy.
And it's a bad policy.
And it won't help us grow.
 I'll get it done.
I'll get it done.
First year...
 ... we can't -- we have not seen Republicans serious about this issue at all.
And it's time for them to get serious on it.
 This used to be a bipartisan issue.
 OK.
 I'm sorry.
What's your name?
 Great to see you.
 Ah.
 Well, let me first of all talk about our diplomats, because they serve all around the world and do an incredible job in a very dangerous situation.
And these aren't just representatives of the United States, they are my representatives.
I send them there, oftentimes into harm's way.
I know these folks and I know their families.
So nobody is more concerned about their safety and security than I am.
 Now Governor Romney had a very different response.
While we were still dealing with our diplomats being threatened, Governor Romney put out a press release, trying to make political points, and that's not how a commander in chief operates.
You don't turn national security into a political issue.
Certainly not right when it's happening.
And people -- not everybody agrees with some of the decisions I've made.
But when it comes to our national security, I mean what I say.
I said I'd end the war in Libya -- in -- in Iraq, and I did.
 Thank you Kerry for your question, it's an important one.
And -- and I -- I think the president just said correctly that the buck does stop at his desk and -- and he takes responsibility for -- for that -- for the failure in providing those security resources, and -- and those terrible things may well happen from time to time.
I -- I'm -- I feel very deeply sympathetic for the families of those who lost loved ones.
And today there's a memorial service for one of those that was lost in this tragedy.
We -- we think of their families and care for them deeply.
There were other issues associated with this -- with this tragedy.
There were many days that passed before we knew whether this was a spontaneous demonstration, or actually whether it was a terrorist attack.
 And there was no demonstration involved.
It was a terrorist attack and it took a long time for that to be told to the American people.
Whether there was some misleading, or instead whether we just didn't know what happened, you have to ask yourself why didn't we know five days later when the ambassador to the United Nations went on TV to say that this was a demonstration.
How could we have not known?
 Secretary Clinton has done an extraordinary job.
But she works for me.
I'm the president and I'm always responsible, and that's why nobody's more interested in finding out exactly what happened than I do.
 Yes, I -- I...
 I -- I think interesting the president just said something which -- which is that on the day after the attack he went into the Rose Garden and said that this was an act of terror.
 That's what I said.
 You said in the Rose Garden the day after the attack, it was an act of terror.
 Please proceed governor.
 I want to make sure we get that for the record because it took the president 14 days before he called the attack in Benghazi an act of terror.
 Get the transcript.
 Can you say that a little louder, Candy?
 This -- the administration -- the administration indicated this was a reaction to a video and was a spontaneous reaction.
 It took them a long time to say this was a terrorist act by a terrorist group.
And to suggest -- am I incorrect in that regard, on Sunday, the -- your secretary --
 Candy?
 Excuse me.
The ambassador of the United Nations went on the Sunday television shows and spoke about how --
 Candy, I'm --
 -- this was a spontaneous --
 I'm happy to have a longer conversation --
 -- about foreign policy.
 OK.
I'm happy to do that, too.
 I just want to make sure that --
 -- all of these wonderful folks are going to have a chance to get some of their questions answered.
 We're a nation that believes in the Second Amendment, and I believe in the Second Amendment.
We've got a long tradition of hunting and sportsmen and people who want to make sure they can protect themselves.
 Yeah, I'm not in favor of new pieces of legislation on -- on guns and taking guns away or making certain guns illegal.
We, of course, don't want to have automatic weapons, and that's already illegal in this country to have automatic weapons.
What I believe is we have to do, as the president mentioned towards the end of his remarks there, which is to make enormous efforts to enforce the gun laws that we have, and to change the culture of violence that we have.
 Well, Candy, actually, in my state, the pro-gun folks and the anti-gun folks came together and put together a piece of legislation.
And it's referred to as an assault weapon ban, but it had, at the signing of the bill, both the pro-gun and the anti-gun people came together, because it provided opportunities for both that both wanted.
 We have --
 Candy?
 -- we haven't had the leadership in Washington to work on a bipartisan basis.
I was able to do that in my state and bring these two together.
 The -- first of all, I think Governor Romney was for an assault weapons ban before he was against it.
And he said that the reason he changed his mind was, in part, because he was seeking the endorsement of the National Rifle Association.
So that's on the record.
 But -- but it'll -- it'll -- it'll be...
 ... just one second.
 Because -- because this is important.
This is part of the choice in this election.
 I understand.
 But this will make a difference in terms of whether or not we can move this economy forward for these young people...
 ... and reduce our violence.
 Boy, great question and important question, because you're absolutely right.
The place where we've seen manufacturing go has been China.
China is now the largest manufacturer in the world.
It used to be the United States of America.
A lot of good people have lost jobs.
A half a million manufacturing jobs have been lost in the last four years.
That's total over the last four years.
 OK. We need to create jobs here.
And both Governor Romney and I agree actually that we should lower our corporate tax rate.
It's too high.
But there's a difference in terms of how we would do it.
I want to close loopholes that allow companies to deduct expenses when they move to China; that allow them to profit offshore and not have to get taxed, so they have tax advantages offshore.
 The answer is very straightforward.
We can compete with anyone in the world as long as the playing field is level.
China's been cheating over the years.
One by holding down the value of their currency.
Number two, by stealing our intellectual property; our designs, our patents, our technology.
There's even an Apple store in China that's a counterfeit Apple store, selling counterfeit goods.
They hack into our computers.
We will have to have people play on a fair basis, that's number one.
 ...is completely...is completely...
 ...is completely false.
Let me tell you...
 Candy, there are some jobs that are not going to come back.
Because they are low wage, low skill jobs.
I want high wage, high skill jobs.
That's why we have to emphasize manufacturing.
That's why we have to invest in advanced manufacturing.
That's why we've got to make sure that we've got the best science and research in the world.
And when we talk about deficits, if we're adding to our deficit for tax cuts for folks who don't need them, and we're cutting investments in research and science that will create the next Apple, create the next new innovation that will sell products around the world, we will lose that race.
 Government does not create jobs.
Government does not create jobs.
 Barry?
Where is Barry?
 Thank you, and that's an opportunity for me, and I appreciate it.
 I understand that I can get this country on track again.
We don't have to settle for what we're going through.
We don't have to settle for gasoline at four bucks.
We don't have to settle for unemployment at a chronically high level.
We don't have to settle for 47 million people on food stamps.
We don't have to settle for 50 percent of kids coming out of college not able to get work.
We don't have to settle for 23 million people struggling to find a good job.
 I'll get our incomes up.
And by the way, I've done these things.
I served as governor and showed I could get them done.
 Barry, I think a lot of this campaign, maybe over the last four years, has been devoted to this nation that I think government creates jobs, that that somehow is the answer.
 Thank you.
Are you a teacher?
Yes, I think that's a very good question because I heard from lots of teachers and parents about some of our concerns about some of the things being said and done in this campaign.
And I think it is very important for us to make clear to our children that our country really is great because we are good.
And we are going to respect one another, lift each other up.
We are going to be looking for ways to celebrate our diversity and we are going to try to reach out to every boy and girl as well as every adult to bring them into working on behalf of our country.
I have a positive and optimistic view of what we can do together.
Thats why the slogan of my campaign is stronger together.
Because I think if we work together, if we overcome the divisiveness that sometimes sets Americans against one another and instead we make some big goals and Ive set forth some big goals, getting the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top.
Making sure we have the best education from preschool through college and making it affordable and so much else.
If we set those goals and we go together to try to achieve them, there is nothing, in my opinion, America can't do.
I hope we will all come together in this campaign.
Obviously I'm hoping to earn your vote, Im hoping to be elected in November and I can promise you I will work with every American.
I want to be the president for all Americans regardless of your political beliefs, what you look like, your religion.
I want us to heal our country and bring it together.
Because that's, I think, the best way to get the future that our children and grandchildren deserve.
 Well Ill actually agree with that.
I agree with everything she said.
I began this campaign because I was so tired of seeing such foolish things happen to our country.
This is a great country.
This is a great land.
I have gotten to know the people of the country over the last year and a half that I have been doing this as a politician.
I cannot believe I'm saying that about myself, but I guess I have been a politician.
And my whole concept was to make America great again.
When I watch the deals being made.
When I watch what's happening with some horrible things like Obamacare where your health insurance and health care is going up by numbers that are astronomical: 68%, 59%, 71%.
When I look at the Iran deal and how bad a deal it is for us, its a one-sided transaction, where were giving back $150 billion to a terrorist state, really the number one terrorist state, weve made them a strong country from, really, a very weak country just three years ago.
When I look at all of the things that I see and all of the potential that our country has, we have such tremendous potential.
Whether it's in business and trade, where we are doing so badly.
Last year we had an almost $800 billion trade deficit.
In other words, trading with other countries.
We had an $800 billion deficit.
Its hard to believe.
Inconceivable.
You say whos making these deals?
Were going to make great trade deals, were going to have a strong border, were going to bring back law and order.
Just today, policeman was shot.
Two killed.
And this is happening on a weekly basis.
We have to bring back respect to law enforcement.
At the same time we have to take cake of people on all sides.
We need justice.
But I want to do things that havent been done, including fixing and making our inner cities better for the African-American citizens that are so great and for the Latinos, hispanics, and I looking forward to doing- Its called make America great again.
 No, I didnt say that at all.
I don't think you understood what was said.
This was locker room talk.
I am not proud of it.
I apologize to my family, I apologized to the American people.
Certainly, I am not proud of it.
But this is locker room talk.
You know, when we have a world where you have ISIS chopping off heads, where you have them, frankly, drowning people in steel cages, where you have wars and horrible, horrible sights all over and you have so many bad things happening, this is like medieval times.
We havent seen anything likes this.
The carnage all over the world and they look and they see, can you imagine the people that are frankly doing so well against us with ISIS and they look at our country and see what's going on.
Yes, I am very embarrassed by it and I hate it, but it's locker room talk and its one of those things.
I will knock the hell out of ISIS.
We are going to defeat ISIS.
ISIS happened a number of years ago in a vacuum that was left because of bad judgment.
And I will tell you, I will take care of ISIS.
We need to get on to much more important and bigger things.
 I have great respect for women.
Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
 Frankly, you hear these things.
They are said.
And I was am embarrassed by it.
But I have respect for women--
 -- And they have respect for me.
And I will tell you, no I have not.
And I will tell you, that Im going to make our country safe and were going to have borders which we don't have now.
People are pouring into our country and theyre coming in from the Middle East and other places.
Were gonna make America safe again, were gonna make America great again but were gonna make America safe again and were gonna make America wealthy again.
Because if you don't do that, it just, it sounds harsh to say, but we have to build up the wealth of our nation.
Other nations are taking our job and theyre taking our wealth.
 Well, like everyone else, Ive spent a lot of time thinking over the last 48 hours about what we heard and saw.
You know, with prior Republican nominees for president, I disagreed with them on politics, policies, principles, but I never questioned their fitness to serve.
Donald Trump is different.
I said starting back in June that he was not fit to be president and commander in chief.
And many Republicans and independents have said the same thing.
What we all saw and heard on Friday was Donald talking about women, what he thinks about women, what he does to women, and he has said that the video doesnt represent who he is.
But I think it's clear to anyone who heard it, that it represents exactly who he is.
Because we have seen this throughout the campaign.
We have seen him insult women.
We have seen him rate women on their appearance, ranking them from one to ten, weve seen him embarrass women on TV and on Twitter.
We saw him after the first debate, spend nearly a week denigrating a former miss universe in the harshest, most personal terms.
So, yes, this is who Donald Trump is.
But it's not only women and its not only this video that raises questions about his fitness to be our president.
Because he has also targeted immigrants, African-Americans, Latinos, people with disabilities, POWs, Muslims and so many others.
So this is who Donald Trump is.
And the question for us, the question our country must answer is that this is not who we are.
That's why to go back to your question, I want to send a message.
We all should, to every boy and girl and indeed, to the entire world.
That America already is great, but we are great because we are good.
And we will respect one another and we will work with one another and we will celebrate our diversity.
These are very important values to me because this is the America that I know and love.
And I can pledge to you tonight that this is the America that I will serve if I'm so fortunate enough to become your president.
 Id like to respond to that.
I assume I can.
 It's just words, folks.
It's just words.
These words, I have been hearing for many years.
I heard them when they were running for the Senate in New York where Hillary was going to bring back jobs to upstate New York and she failed.
Ive heard them where Hillary is constantly talking about the inner cities of our country which are a disaster education-wise, job-wise, safety-wise, in every way possible.
Im going to help the African-Americans, Im going to help the Latinos, hispanics.
I am going to help the inner cities.
She has done a terrible job for the African-Americans.
She wants their vote and she does nothing.
And then she comes back four years later, we saw that firsthand when she saw United States senator, she campaigned where--
 She is allowed to do that, but I'm not?
Sounds fair, sounds fair.
 That was locker room talk.
I'm not proud of it.
I am a person who has great respect for people, for my family, for the people of this country and certainly I am not proud of it, but that was something that happened.
If you look at Bill Clinton, far worse.
Mine are words and his was action.
His words, what he has done to women.
Theres never been anybody in the history of politics in this nation that has been so abusive to women.
So you can say any way you want to say it, but Bill Clinton is abusive to women.
Hillary Clinton attacked those same women, and attacked them viciously, four of them here tonight.
One of the women, who is a wonderful woman at 12 years old was raped.
At 12.
Her client, she represented, got him off and she is seen laughing on two occasions laughing at the girl who was raped.
Kathy Shelton, that young woman, is here with us tonight.
So don't tell me about words.
I am, absolutely, I apologize for those words, but it is things that people say, but what President Clinton did, he was impeached, he lost his license to practice law, he had to pay an $850,000 fine to one of the women.
Paula Jones who is also here tonight.
And I will tell you that when Hillary brings up a point like that and she talks about words that I said 11 years ago, I think it's disgraceful and I think she should be ashamed of herself, if you want to know the truth.
 Well, first let me start by saying that so much of what he just said is not right, but he gets to run his campaign any way he chooses.
He gets to decide what he wants to talk about instead of answering people's questions, talking about our agenda, laying out the plans that we have that we think can make a better life and a better country.
That's his choice.
When I hear something like that, I am reminded of what my friend Michelle Obama advised us all.
When they go low, you go high.
 Well you owe the president an apology because as you know very well, your campaign, Sidney Blumenthal, hes another real winner that you have and hes the one that got this started along with your campaign manager and they were on television just two weeks ago, she was saying exactly that.
So you really owe him an apology.
Youre the one that sent the pictures around, your campaign sent the pictures around with President Obama in a certain garb, that was long before I was ever involved.
So you actually owe an apology.
Number two, Michelle Obama.
Ive gotten to see the commercials that they did on you and the Ive gotten to see some of the most vicious commercials Ive ever seen, of Michelle Obama talking about you, Hillary.
So you talk about framed, go back and take a look at those commercials.
A race where you lost, fair and square, unlike the Bernie Sanders race where you won, but not fair and square, in my opinion and all you have to do is take a look at WikiLeaks and just see what they said about Bernie Sanders and see what Debra Wasserman Schultz had in mind, because Bernie Sanders, between superdelegates and Debra Wasserman Schultz, he never had a chance and I was so surprised to see him sign on with the devil.
But when we talk about apology, I think the one that you should really be apologizing for, the thing that you should be apologizing for are the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted and that you acid washed and the two boxes of e-mails and other things last week that were taken from an office and are now missing.
And I tell you what, I didn't think I would say this, but I'm going to and I hate to say it.
But if I win, I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation.
Because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.
There has never been anything like it.
And were gonna have a special prosecutor.
When I speak, I go out and speak, the people of this country are furious.
In my opinion, the people that have been long time workers at the FBI are furious.
There has never been anything like this where e-mails, and you get a subpoena.
You get a subpoena, and after getting the subpoena you delete 33,000 e-mails and then you acid wash them or bleach them, as you would say.
Very expensive process.
So were gonna get a special prosecutor and were gonna look into it.
Because you know what, people have been -- their lives have been destroyed for doing 1/5 of what you have done.
And its a disgrace, and honestly, you oughta be ashamed of yourself.
 Everything he just said is absolutely false, but Im not surprised.
In the first debate, I told people it would be impossible to be fact checking Donald all the time.
I would never get to talk about anything Id want to do and how were really, going to really, make lives better for people.
So once again, go to Hillaryclinton.com.
We have literally Trump - you can fact check him in real time.
Last time at the first debate ,we had millions of people fact checking so I expect we will have millions more fact checking because, you know, it's just awfully good that someone with the temperament of Donald Trump is not in charge of the law in our country.
 Because you would be in jail.
 And yet she didn't know the word, the letter C on a document.
Right?
She didn't even know what that letter meant.
You know, it's amazing.
I'm watching Hillary go over facts and she is going after fact after fact and shes lying again because she said she, you know, what she did with e-mails was fine.
You think it was fine to delete 33,000 e-mails?
I don't think so.
She said that 33,000 e-mails had to do with her daughter's wedding, number one and a yoga class.
Well, maybe we will give three or three or four or five or something.
33,000 e-mails deleted and now shes saying there wasnt anything wrong.
And more importantly, that was after getting a subpoena.
That wasnt before.
That was after.
She got it from the United States Congress, and I will be honest.
I am so disappointed in congressmen, including Republicans, for allowing this to happen.
Our Justice Department where her husband goes on to the back of an airplane for 39 minutes, talks to the Attorney General days before a ruling has to be made on her case.
But for you to say that there was nothing wrong with you deleting 39,000 e-mails, again, you should be ashamed of yourself.
What you did, now this was after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress--
 Hold on, wait a minute, if a member of the private sector did that, theyd be in jail.
Let alone, after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
 It's just not true.
 You didn't delete them?
 They were personal e-mails and not official.
We turned over 35,000.
 What are about the other 15,000.
 Yes, that's true.
I didn't.
 Because you had nothing to say.
 I didnt in the first debate and Im gonna try not to on this debate because I would like to get to the questions people brought to us tonight.
 And get off this question.
 Okay, Donald.
I know you are into big diversion tonight, anything to avoid talking about your campaign and the way its exploding, and the way Republicans are leaving you, but --
 Lets see what happens.
 Lets get to the issues that people care about tonight.
Let's get to their question.
 Id liked to know Anderson, Why aren't you bringing up the e-mails?
Id like to know.
 No it hasnt, it hasnt and it hasn't been finished at all.
 One on three.
 He wants to start it, he can start it.
No, go ahead, Donald.
 No, I'm a gentlemen, Hillary.
Go ahead.
 I think Donald was about to say hes gonna solve it by repealing it and getting rid of the Affordable Care Act.
And I'm going to fix it because I agree with you.
Premiums have gotten too high, copays, deductibles, prescription drug costs and I have laid out a series of actions that we can take to try to get those costs down.
But here's what I don't want people to forget when were talking about reigning in the cost that has to be the highest priority of the next president.
When the affordable care act passed, it wasn't just that 20 million people got insurance who didn't have it before.
But that, in and of itself is a good thing.
I meet these people all the time and they tell me what a difference having that insurance meant to them and their families.
But everybody else, the 170 million of us who get health insurance through our employers got big benefits.
Number one, insurance companies can't deny you coverage because of a preexisting condition.
Number two, no lifetime limits which is a big deal if you have serious health problems.
Number three, women can't be charged more than men for our health insurance, which is the way it used to be before the affordable care act.
Number four, if you are under 26 and your parents have a policy, you can be on that policy until the age of 26, something that didn't happen before.
So I want very much to save what works and is good about the affordable care act.
But weve got to get costs down, weve got to provide some additional help to small businesses so that they can afford to provide health insurance.
But if we repeal it as Donald has proposed and start over again, all of those benefits I mentioned are lost to everybody.
Not just people who get health insurance on the exchange.
And then we would have to start all over again.
Right now we are at 90% health insurance coverage.
That's the highest we have ever been, in our country.
I want to get to 100% and get cost down and quality up.
 It is such a great question and its maybe the question I get almost, more than anything else.
Outside of defense.
Obamacare is a disaster.
You know it, we all know it.
It's going up at numbers that nobodys ever seen, worldwide.
Its-nobody has ever seen numbers like this for health care.
It's only getting worse.
In 17, it implodes by itself.
Their method of fixing it is to go back and ask Congress for more money.
More, more money and we have right now almost $20 trillion in debt.
Obamacare will never work.
Its very bad, very bad health insurance, far too expensive, and not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expensive for our country.
Its going to be one of the biggest line items very shortly.
We have to repeal it and replace it with something absolutely much less expensive.
And something that works, where your plan can actually be tailored.
We have to get rid of the lines around the state, artificial lines, where we stop insurance companies from coming in and competing because they wanted President Obama and whoever was working on it, they want to leave those lines because that gives the insurance companies, essentially monopolies.
We want competition.
You will have the finest health care plan there is.
She wants to go to a single player plan which would be a disaster.
Somewhat similar to Canada.
If you ever noticed, the Canadians, when they need a big operation, when something happens, they come into the United States in many cases.
Because their system is so slow, it's catastrophic in certain ways.
But she wants to go to single payer, which means the government basically rules everything.
Hillary Clinton has been after this for years.
Obamacare was the first step, Obamacare is a total disaster and not only are your rates going up by numbers that nobodys ever believed, but your deductibles are going up.
So that unless you get hit by a truck, you will never be able to use it.
It's a disastrous plan and it has to be repealed and replaced.
 No.
I mean, he clarified what he meant and its very clear.
Look, we are in a situation in our country where if we were to start all over again, we might come up with a different system.
But we have an employer-based system: thats where the vast majority of people get their health care.
And the affordable care act is meant to try to fill the gap between people who are too poor and couldnt put together any resources to afford healthcare, namely people on medicaid.
Obviously, Medicare which is a single payer system which takes care of our elderly, and does a great job doing it, by the way, and then all the people who were employed, but people who were working but didn't have the money to afford insurance and didnt have anybody, an employer or anybody else to help them.
That was the slot that the Obamacare approach was to take.
And like I say, 20 million people now have health insurance.
So, if we rip it up and throw it away, what Donald is not telling you is we turn it back to the insurance companies the way it used to be.
And that means that insurance companies get to do pretty much whatever they want including saying look, I'm sorry, you have diabetes, you had cancer--
 --Your child had asthma, you may not be able to have insurance because you can't afford it.
So let's fix what's broken about it, but lets not throw it away and give it back to the insurance companies.
That's not going to work.
 I want to -- just one thing.
Hillary, everything is broken about it.
Everything.
Number two, Bernie Sanders said Hillary Clinton has very bad judgment.
This is a perfect example of it.
Trying to save Obamacare--
 Youre going to have plans.
 Well, Ill tell you what it means.
Youre gonna have plans that are so good because were going to have so much competition in the insurance industry, once we break out the lines and allow the competition to come.
 Excuse me.
President Obama by keeping those lines, the boundary lines around each state and it was almost done until just towards the end of the passage of Obamacare.
Which by the way was a fraud.
You know that.
Because Jonathan Grouper, the architect of Obamacare was said, he said it was a great lie, it was a big lie.
President Obama said you keep your doctor, keep your plan.
The whole thing was a fraud and it doesn't work.
But when we get rid of those lines, you have competition and we will be able to keep preexisting, well also be able to help people that can't get, don't have money because we are going to have people protected.
And Republicans feel this way.
Believe it or not, were going to block grant into the states were going to block grant into medicaid so we will be able to take care of people without the necessary funds to cake care of themselves.
 You are right about Islamophobia and that's a shame.
But one thing we have to do is, we have to make sure that, because there is a problem.
I mean, whether we like it or not and we can be politically correct, but whether we like it or not, there is a problem.
And we have to be sure that Muslims come in and report when they see something going on.
When they see hatred going on, they have to report it.
As the example in San Bernardino.
Many people saw the bombs all over the apartment of the two people that killed 14 and wounded many, many people.
Horribly wounded, they will never be the same.
Muslims have to report the problems when they see them.
And, you know, there is always a reason for everything.
If they don't do that, it's a very difficult situation for our country.
Because you look at Orlando and you look at San Bernardino and you look at the World Trade Center.
Go outside and you look at Paris, look at that horrible thing.
These are radical Islamic terrorists and she won't even mention the word and nor will President Obama.
He won't use the term radical Islamic terrorist, no.
To solve a problem you have to be able to state what the problem is or at least, say the name.
She won't say the name and President Obama won't say the name.
But the name is there.
It's radical Islamic terror.
And before you solve it, you have to say the name.
 Thank you for asking your question and Ive heard this question from a lot of Muslim Americans across our country.
Because unfortunately there has been a lot of very divise, dark things said about Muslims.
And even someone like Captain Khan, the young man who sacrificed himself defending our country in the United States Army has been subject to attack by Donald.
I want to say just a couple of things.
First: Weve had Muslims in America since George Washington.
And weve had many successful Muslims.
We just lost a particularly well-known one with Muhammad Ali.
My vision of America is an America where everyone has a place, if you are willing to work hard, do your part and you contribute to the community.
That's what America is.
That's what we want America to be for our children and our grandchildren.
It's also very short-sighted and even dangerous to be engaging in the kind of demagogic rhetoric that Donald has about Muslims.
We need American Muslims to be part of our eyes and ears on our front lawns.
Ive worked with a lot of Muslim groups around America.
Ive met with a lot of them and Ive heard how important it is for them to feel that they are wanted and included and part of our country.
Part of our homeland security.
And that's what I want to see.
It's also important, I intend to defeat ISIS,to do so in a coalition with majority Muslim nations.
Right now, a lot of those nations are hearing what Donald says and wondering why should we cooperate with the Americans and this is a gift to ISIS and the terrorists.
Violent jihadist terrorists.
We are not at war with Islam and it is a mistake, and it plays into the hands of the terrorists, to act as though we are.
So I want a country where citizens like you and your family are just as welcome as anyone else.
 First of all, Captain Khan is an American hero and if I were president at that time he would be alive today because, unlike her who voted for the war without knowing what she was doing, I would not have had our people in Iraq.
Iraq was a disaster.
So he would have been alive today.
The Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into an extreme vetting from certain areas of the world.
Hillary Clinton wants to allow --
 It is called extreme vetting.
We are going to areas like Syria where they are coming in by the tens of thousands because of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton wants wants to allow a 550% increase over Obama.
People are coming into our country like we have no idea who they are, where they are from, what their feelings about our country is and she wants 550% more.
This is going to be the great Trojan horse of all time.
We have enough problems in this country.
I believe in building safe zone, I believe in having other people pay for them, as an example the [Arabian] Gulf states who are not carrying their weight but they have nothing but money and take care of people.
But I don't want to have, with all the problems this country has and all of the problems you see going on, hundreds of thousands of people come in from Syria where we know nothing about them.
We know nothing about their values and we know nothing about their love for our country.
 First of all, I will not let anyone into our country that I think poses a risk to us.
But there are a lot of refugees, women and children, think of that picture we all saw of that 4-year-old boy with the blood on his forehead because hed been bombed by the Russian and Syrian air forces.
There are children suffering in this catastrophic war, largely, I believe because of Russian aggression.
And we need to do our part.
We, by no means, are carrying anywhere near the load that Europe and others are.
But we will have vetting that is as tough as it needs to be from our professionals, our intelligence experts and others.
But it is important for us as a policy not to say, as Donald has said, were going to ban people based on a religion.
How do you that?
We are a country founded on religious freedom and liberty.
How do we do what he has advocated without causing great distress within our own country?
Are we going to have religious tests when people fly into our country and how do we expect to be able to implement those?
So I thought that what he said was extremely unwise and even dangerous and indeed you can look at the propaganda on a lot of the terrorist sites and what Donald Trump says about Muslims is used to recruit fighters.
Because they want to create a war between us.
And the final thing I say, this is the 10th or 12th time he denied being for the war in Iraq.
We have it on tape, the entire press corps has looked at it, its been debunked but it never stops him from saying whatever he wants to say.
Go to Hillaryclinton.com.
 It has not been debunked.
I was against the war in Iraq.
 Go to Hillaryclinton.com and you can see it.
 It has not been debunked and you voted for it and shouldn't have.
 Excuse me, she just went about 25 seconds over her time.
Can I respond?
 Hillary Clinton in terms of having people come into our country.
We have many criminal illegal aliens.
When we want to send them back to their country, their country says: we don't want them.
In some cases they are murderers, drug lords, drug problems and they don't want them.
And Hillary Clinton when she was Secretary of State said, thats okay, we cant force them back into their country.
Let me tell you, Im going to force them right back into their country.
They are murderers and some very bad people.
And I will tell you very strongly, when Bernie Sanders said she had bad judgment, she has really bad judgement because we are letting people into this country that are gonna cause problems and crime like youve never seen.
Were also letting drugs pour through our southern border at a record clip.
At a record clip.
And It shouldn't be allowed to happen.
ICE just endorsed me.
They never endorsed a presidential candidate.
The border patrol agents, 16,500 just recently endorsed me.
And they endorsed me because I understand the border.
She doesn't.
She wants amnesty for everybody.
Come right in.
Come right over.
It's a horrible thing she is doing.
Shes got bad judgment and honestly, so bad that she should never be president of the United States.
That I can tell you.
 Right.
As I recall, that was something I said about Abraham Lincoln after having seen the wonderful Steven Spielberg movie called Lincoln.
It was a master class watching president Lincoln get the congress to approve the 13th amendment.
It was principled and it was strategic and I was making the point that it is hard, sometimes, to get the congress to do what you want to do.
And you have to keep working at it and yes, president Lincoln was trying to convince some people, he used some arguments, convincing other people, he used other arguments.
That was a great, I thought, a great display of presidential leadership.
But, you know, let's talk about what's really going on here, Martha because our intelligence community just came out and said in the last few days that the Kremlin, meaning Putin and the Russian government, are directing the attacks, the hacking on American accounts to influence our election.
And WikiLeaks is part of that as are other sites where the Russians hack information, we don't even know if it's accurate information and then they put it out.
We have never in the history of our country been in a situation where an adversary, a foreign power, is working so hard to influence the outcome of the election, and believe, theyre not doing it to get me elected.
They are doing it to try to influence the election for Donald Trump.
Now, maybe because he praised Putin, maybe because he says he agrees with a lot of what Putin wants to do, maybe because he wants to do business in Moscow.
I dont know the reasons, but we deserve answers, and should demand that Donald release all of his tax returns so that people can see what are the entanglements and the financial relationships--
 I think I should respond because, so ridiculous.
Look, now she is blaming -- she got caught in a total lie.
Her papers went out to all her friends at the banks, Goldman Sachs and everybody else.
And she said things, WikiLeaks, that just came out.
And she lied.
Now shes blaming the lie on the late great Abraham Lincoln.
Thats when-okay, Honest Abe never lied.
Thats the good thing.
That's the big difference between Abraham Lincoln and you.
That's a big, big difference.
Were talking about some difference.
But, as far as other elements of what you were saying, I don't know Putin.
I think it would be great if we got along with Russia because we could fight ISIS together, as an example, but I don't know Putin.
But I notice, any time anything wrong happens, they like to say the Russians, well she doesn't know if it's the Russians doing the hacking.
Maybe there is no hacking, but there is - now Russia - and the reason they blame Russia is they think theyre trying to tarnish me with Russia.
I know nothing about Russia - I know about Russia, but I know nothing about the inner workings of Russia.
I dont deal there, I have no businesses there, I have no loans from Russia.
I have a very very great balance sheet.
So great that when I did the old post office, on Pennsylvania Avenue, the United States government because of my balance sheet, which they actually know very well, chose me to do the old post office between the White House and Congress.
They chose me to do the old post office - one of the primary things, in fact, perhaps the primary thing was balance sheet.
But I have no loans with Russia.
You could go to the United States government and they would probably tell you that because they know my sheet very well in order to get that development, I had to have - now the taxes are a very simple thing.
As soon as I have - first of all, I pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
Many of her friends took bigger deductions.
Warren Buffett took a massive deduction, Soros, whos a friend of hers took a massive deduction.
Many of the people that are giving her all this money so that she can do many more commercials than me, gave her - took massive deductions.
I pay hundreds of millions in taxes, but, but as soon as my routine audit is finished, Ill release my returns.
Ill be very proud to.
 One thing Id do is get rid of carried interest.
The - one of the greatest provisions for people like me, to be honest with you, I give up a lot when I run because I knockout the tax code.
And she could have done this years ago, by the way.
She is - she was a United States senator.
She complains that Donald Trump took advantage of the tax code.
Well, why didn't you change it, why didnt you change it when you were a senator?
The reason you didnt is that all your friends take the same advantage that I do.
And they do, you have provisions in the tax code, that frankly, we could change.
But you wouldn't change it because all of these people gave you the money so you can take negative ads on Donald Trump.
But, and I say that about a lot of things.
I heard Hillary complaining about so many different things over the years, I wish we would have done this.
But shes been there for 30 years, shes been doing this stuff, she never changed, and she never will change.
She never will change.
We are getting rid of carried interest provisions.
Im lowering taxes, actually, because I think it's so important for corporations because we have corporations leaving, massive corporations, and little ones.
The little ones can't form.
We are getting rid of regulations, which goes hand in hand with the, lowering the taxes.
But were bringing the tax rate down from 35% to 15%.
We are cutting taxes for the middle class and I will tell you, we are cutting them big league for the middle class.
And Ill tell you, Hillary Clinton is raising your taxes, folks, she can look at me, she is raising your taxes, really high and what that's going to do is a disaster for the country.
But she is raising the taxes and I'm lowering the taxes.
That in itself is a big difference.
We are going to be thriving again.
We have no growth in this country.
There is no growth.
If China has a GDP of 7% it's like a national catastrophe.
Were down at 1%, and that's like no growth.
And we are going lower, in my opinion.
And a lot of that has to do with the fact that our taxes are so high.
Just about the highest in the world, and I'm bringing them down to one of the lower in the world.
And I think it's so important.
One of the most important things we can do.
But she is raising everybody's taxes massively.
 Well, everything youve heard from Donald is not true.
I'm sorry I have to keep saying this, but he lives in an alternative reality.
And it is sort of amusing to hear somebody who hasn't paid federal income taxes in maybe 20 years talking about what hes going to do, but Ill tell you what hes going to do.
His plan will give the wealthy and corporations the biggest tax cuts they have ever had.
More than the Bush tax cuts by at least a factor of two.
Donald always takes care of Donald and people like Donald.
And this would be a massive gift.
And indeed the way that he talks about his tax cuts would end up raising taxes on middle class families.
Millions of middle class families.
Now, here's what I want to do.
I have said nobody who makes less than $250,000 a year and that's the vast majority of Americans, as you know will have their taxes raised.
Because I think we have got to go where the money is and the money is with people who have taken advantage of every single break in the tax code.
And yes, when I was a senator, I did vote to close corporate loopholes.
I voted to close, I think, one of the loopholes he took advantage of when he claimed a billion dollar loss that enabled him to avoid paying taxes.
I want to have a tax on people who are making a million dollars, it's called the Buffett rule.
Yes, Warren Buffett is the one whos gone out and said somebody like him should not be paying a lower tax rate than his secretary.
I wanna have a surcharge on incomes above 5 million.
We have to make up for lost times, because I want to invest in you, I want to invest in hard working families.
And I think it has been unfortunate, but it's happened, that since the great recession, the gains have all gone to the top.
And we need to reverse that.
People like Donald who paid zero in taxes, zero for our vets, zero for our military, zero for health and education.
That is wrong.
And were going to make sure that nobody, no corporation and no individual can get away without paying his fair share to support our country.
 Of course I did.
Of course I did.
And so do all of her donors, or most of her donors.
I know many of her donors.
Her donors took massive tax write offs.
A lot lot of my write off was depreciation and a lot of other things Hillary Clinton as a senator allowed and she always allowed because the people that give her all this money, they want it.
Thats why.
See, I understand the tax code better than anybody thats ever run for president.
Hillary Clinton is extremely complex.
Hillary Clinton has friends that want all of these provisions, including, they want the carried interest provision, which is very important to Wall Street people, but they really want the carried interest provision, which I believe Hillary is leaving, and it's very interesting why she is leaving carried interest.
But I will tell, you that, number one, I pay tremendous numbers of taxes.
I absolutely used it and so did Warren Buffett and so did George Soros and so did many of the other people that Hillary is getting money from.
Now, I won't mention their names because they are rich, but theyre not famous.
So we wont make them famous.
 No.
but I pay tax and I pay federal tax too.
But I have a write off, a lot of it is depreciation, which is a wonderful charge.
I love depreciation.
You know, she has given it to us.
Hey, if she had a problem, for 30 years shes been doing this, Anderson, I say it all the time, she talks about health care.
Why didn't you do something about it?
She talks about taxes.
Why didn't she do something about it?
She doesn't do anything about anything other than talk.
With her, it's all talk and no action.
And again, Bernie Sanders, it's really bad judgment.
She has made bad judgment not only on taxes, shes made bad judgements on Libya, on Syria, on Iraq.
Her and Obama whether you like it or not, the way they got out of Iraq, the vacuum they left, that's why ISIS formed in the first place.
They started from the little area and now they are in 32 different nations, Hillary.
Congratulations.
Great job.
 Well, here we go again.
I have been in favor of getting rid of carried interest for years starting when I was a senator from New York.
But that's not the point here.
 Why didn't you do it?
Why didnt you do it?
 Because I was a senator with a Republican president.
 You could have done it.
If you were an effective senator, you could have done it.
But you were not an effective senator.
 You know, under our constitution, presidents have something called veto power.
Look, he has now said repeatedly 30 years this and 30 years that.
So let me talk about my 30 years in public service.
I'm very glad to do so.
Eight million kids every year have health insurance because when I was first lady I worked with Democrats and Republicans to create the children's health insurance program.
Hundreds of thousands of kids now have a chance to be adopted because I worked to change our adoption and foster care system.
After 9/11, I went to work with Republican mayor, governor and president to rebuild New York and to get health care for our first responders who were suffering because they had run towards danger and gotten sickened by it.
Hundreds of thousands of National Guard and reserve members have healthcare because of work that I did and children have safer medicines because I was able to pass a law that required the dosing to be more carefully done.
When I was secretary of state, I went around the world advocating for our country, but also advocating for women's rights to make sure that women had a decent chance to have a better life and negotiated a treaty with Russia to lower nuclear weapons.
400 pieces of legislation have my name on it as a sponsor or cosponsor when I was a senator for eight years.
I worked very hard and was proud to be reelected in New York by an even bigger margin than I had been elected the first time.
And as president, I will take that work, that bipartisan work, that finding common ground.
Because you have to be able to get along with people to get things done in Washington.
And I have proven that I can and for thirty years, Ive produced results for the people.
 But she said a lot of things that were false.
I think we should --
 The situation in Syria is catastrophic and everyday that goes by, we see the results of the regime, by Assad in partnership with the Iranians on the ground and the Russians in the air, bombarding places in particular aleppo, where there are hundreds of thousands of people, probably about 250,000 people still left.
And there is a determined effort by the Russian Air Force to destroy Aleppo in order to eliminate the last of the Syrian rebels who are really holding out against the Assad regime.
Russia hasn't paid any attention to ISIS.
They are interested in keeping Assad in power.
So I, when I was secretary of state advocated, and I advocate today a no-fly and safe zones.
We need some leverage with the Russians because they are not going to come to the negotiating table for a diplomatic resolution unless there is leverage over them.
And we have to work more closely with our partners and allies on the ground.
But I want to emphasize that what is at stake here is the ambitions and aggressiveness of Russia.
Russia has decided it is all in in Syria, and theyve also decided who they want to see become President of the United States too and it's not me.
I stood up to Russia; Ive taken on Putin and others and I would do that as president.
I think wherever we can cooperate with Russia, that's fine and I did, as Secretary of State, that's how we got a treaty reducing nuclear weapons, its how we got the sanctions on Iran that put a lid on the nuclear weapons program without firing a single shot.
So I would go with more leverage than we have now.
But I support the efforts to investigate for crimes, war crimes, committed by the Syrians and the Russians and try to hold them accountable.
 First of all, she was there as Secretary of State with the so-called line in the sand.
 No I wasn't, I was gone.
I hate to interrupt you.
At some point we need to get the facts out.
 You were still in contact with the White House.
And perhaps sadly, Obama probably still listened to you.
I don't think he would listen to you very much anymore.
Obama draws the line in the sand.
It was laughed at all over the world what happened.
Now, with that being said, she talks tough against Russia, but our nuclear program has fallen way behind and they have gone wild with their nuclear program.
Not good.
Our government shouldnt have allowed that to happen.
Russia is new in terms of nuclear and we are old and tired and exhausted in terms of nuclear.
A very bad thing.
 I don't like Assad at all, but Assad is killing ISIS.
Russia is killing ISIS and Iran is killing ISIS and they have lined up because of weak foreign policy.
 Okay.
He and I haven't spoken, and I disagree.
 I disagree.
Right now, Syria is fighting ISIS.
We have people that want to fight both at the same time.
But Syria is no longer Syria.
Syria is Russia and its Iran who she made strong and Kerry and Obama made into a powerful nation and a rich nation, very quickly, very, very quickly.
I believe we have to get ISIS.
We have to worry about ISIS before we can get too much more involved.
She had a chance to do something with Syria, they had a chance, and that was the line.
 Aleppo is a disaster, humanitarian wise.
 I think that it basically has fallen, okay?
It basically has fallen.
Let me tell you something: you take a look at Mosul.
The biggest problem I have with the stupidity of our foreign policy.
We have Mosul, they think a lot of the ISIS leaders are in Mosul.
So we have announcements out of Washington and coming out Iraq.
We will be attacking Mosul in three weeks or four weeks.
So all of these bad leaders from ISIS are leaving Mosul.
Why can't they do it quietly?
We cant they do the attack and make it a sneak attack and after the attack is made inform the American public that we have knocked out the leaders; weve have a tremendous success.
People leave.
Why do they have to say we are going to be attacking Mosul within the next four to six weeks, which is what theyre saying.
How stupid is our country?
 I can't think of any.
 I can't think of any.
I have 200 generals and admirals who endorsed me.
I have 21 congressional Medal of Honor recipients who endorse me.
We talk about it all the time.
They understand.
Why can't they do something secretively where they go in and knock out the leadership.
Why would these people stay there?
Ive been reading there for weeks about Mosul...Raddatz: Tell me what your strategy is it.
 That its the harbor between Raqqa and Mosul, this is why where they think the ISIS leaders are.
Why would they be staying...they are not staying there anymore.
They are gone.
Because everybody is talking about how Iraq which is us with our leadership goes into fight Mosul.
With the 200 admirals and generals, they can't believe it.
General George Patton and General Douglas MacArthur are spinning in their grave at the stupidity of what we are doing in the Middle East.
 I would not use American ground forces in Syria.
I think that would be a very serious mistake.
I don't think American troops should be holding territory which is what they would have to do as an occupying force.
I don't think that is a smart strategy.
I do think the use of special forces, which were using, the use of enablers and trainers in Iraq, which has had positive effects, are very much in our interests.
So I do support what is happening.
 Everything.
 Martha, I hope that by the time I am president that we will have pushed ISIS out of Iraq.
I do think that there is a good chance that we can take Mosul.
And you know, Donald said he knows more about ISIS than the generals.
No, he doesn't.
There are a lot of very important planning going on and some of it is to signal to the Sunnis in the are,a as well as Kurdish Peshmerga fighters that we all need to be in this.
And that takes a lot of planning and preparation.
I would go after Baghdadi .
I would specifically target Baghdadi.
Because I think our targeting of Al Qaeda leaders, and I was involved in a lot of those operations, highly classified ones, made a difference.
I think that could help.
I would consider arming the Kurds.
The kurds have been our best partners in Syria, as well as Iraq.
And I know theres a lot of concern about that in some circles, but they should have the equipment they need so that Kurdish and Arab fighters on the ground are the principal way we take Raqqa after pushing ISIS out of Iraq.
 You know thats funny.
She went over a minute over and you don't stop her.
When I go one second over --
 It's very interesting.
 Absolutely.
I mean, she calls our people deplorable.
A large group.
And irredeemable.
I will be a president for all of our people.
And Illl be a people that will turn our inner cities around and will give strength to people and will give economics to people and will bring jobs back.
Because NAFTA, signed by her husband, is perhaps the greatest disaster trade deal in the history of the world.
Not of this country.
It stripped us of manufacturing jobs.
We lost our jobs, we lost our money, we lost our plants.
It is a disaster.
 It turned out to be a disaster.
 Well, 67% of the people voted to reelect me when I ran for my second term, and I was very proud and very humbled by that.
Mr. Carter, I have tried my entire life to do what I can to support children and families.
You know, right out of law school I went to work for the children's defense fund.
Donald talks a lot about the 30 years Ive been in public service.
Im proud of that.
You know, I started off as a young lawyer working against discrimination against African-American children and schools and in the criminal justice system.
I worked to make sure that kids with disabilities could get a public education, something I cared very much about.
I worked with Latinos, one of my favorite jobs in politics was down in south Texas registering Latino citizens to be able to vote.
So I have a deep devotion, to use your absolutely correct words, to making sure that every American feels like he or she has a place in our country.
 Well within hours I said I was sorry about the way I talked about that because my argument is not with his supporters, it's with him and the divisive campaign he has run and the inciting of violence at his rallies and the very brutal kinds of comments about not just women, but all Americans.
All kinds of Americans.
And what he said about African-Americans and Latinos, about Muslims, about POWs, about immigrants, about people with disabilities, hes never apologized for.
So I do think that a lot of tone and tenor...
I am proud of the campaigns Bernie Sanders and I ran.
We ran a campaign based on issue, not insults.
He is supporting me 100% because we talked about what we wanted to do.
We might have had differences and we had a lot of debate, but we believed that we could make the country better and I was proud of that.
 We have a divided nation.
We have a very divided nation.
You look at Charlotte, you look at Baltimore, you look at the violence taking place in the inner cities.
Chicago.
You look at Washington, D.C. We have an increase in murder within our cities, the biggest in 45 years.
We have a divided nation because of people like her.
Believe me, she has tremendous hate in her heart.
When she said deplorables, she meant it.
And when she said irredeemable, theyre irredeemable!
You didn't mention that, but when she said theyre irredeemable, to me that might have been worse.
Shes got tremendous hatred.
And this country cannot take another four years of Barack Obama and that's what you are getting with her.
 No it wasn't check out a sex tape.
It was take a look at this person she build up to be this wonderful, uh, girl scout, who was no girl scout.
 Just so you understand: When she said 3 oclock in the morning, take a look at Benghazi.
She said who is going to answer the call at 3 oclock in the morning, guess what?
She didn't answer.
Because when ambassador Stevens -- she said she was awake of at 3:00 in the morning.
And she also sent a tweet out at 3 oclock in the morning, but I wont mention that.
But he said she will be awake, the famous thing were going to answer the call at 3:00 in the morning.
Guess what happened, Ambassador Stevens, Ambassador Stevens sent 600 requests for help and the only one she talked to was Sidney Blumenthal whos her friend and not a good guy, by the way.
So she shouldn't be talking about that.
Now, tweeting happens to be a modern day form of communication.
You can like it or not.
Between Facebook and Twitter, I have 25 million people.
It's a very effective way of communication.
So you can put it down, but it's an effective form of communication.
I'm not unproud of it to be honest with you.
 No.
 I'm shocked to hear that.
 Well, it's not only my opinion, but it's the opinion of many others.
National security experts, Republicans, former Republican members of congress.
But its in part because those of us who have had the great privilege of seeing this job up close and know how difficult it is and it's not just because I watched my husband take a $300 billion deficit and turn it into a $200 billion surplus and 23 million new jobs were created and incomes went up for everybody.
Everybody.
African-American incomes went up 33%.
And its not just because worked with George W. Bush after 9/11 and I was very proud that when I told them what the city need and what we needed to recover, he said you got it and he never wavered.
He stuck with me.
And I have worked and i admire President Obama.
He inherited the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
That was a terrible time for our country.
 9 million people lost their jobs, five million homes were lost.
 And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.
We are back on the right track.
He would send us back into a recession with his tax plan.
 We have the slowest growth and our country is a disaster.
 Thank you.
You are right.
This is one of the most important issues in this election.
I want to appoint Supreme Court justices who understand the way the world really works, who have real life experience.
Who have not just been in a big law firm and maybe clerked for a judge and then gotten on the bench, but maybe they tried more cases.
Actually understand what people are up against.
Because I think the current court has gone in the wrong direction.
I would want to see the Supreme Court reverse Citizens United and get dark unaccountable money out of our politics.
Donald doesn't agree with that.
I would like the Supreme Court to understand that voting rights are a big problem in many parts of the country.
That we don't do always do everything we can to make it possible for people of color and older people and young people to be able to exercise their franchise.
I want a Supreme Court that will stick with Roe v. Wade and a womans right to choose, and I want a Supreme Court that will stick with marriage equality.
Now, Donald put forth of the names of people he would consider.
And among the ones that he has suggested are people who would reverse Roe v. Wade and reverse marriage equality.
I think that would would be a terrible mistake and take us backwards.
I want a Supreme Court that doesnt always side with corporate interests.
I want a Supreme Court that understands because you are wealthy and you can give more money to something doesnt mean you have more rights or should have any more rights than anything else.
So I have clear views about what I want to see to change the balance on the Supreme Court and I regret deeply that the senate has not done its job and they have not permitted a vote on the person that President Obama, a highly qualified person.
They have not given him a vote to be able to have the full complement of nine Supreme Court justices.
I think that was a dereliction of duty.
I hope they will see their way to doing it, but if I am so fortunate as to be president, I will immediately move to make sure that we fill that.
We have nine justices and that they get to work on behalf of our people.
 Justice Scalia, great judge, died recently and we have a vacancy.
I am looking to appoint judges very much in the mold of justice Scalia.
I am looking for judges and have actually picked 20 of them.
So that people would say: Highly respected.
Highly thought of and actually very beautifully reviewed by just about everybody.
But people that will respect the Constitution of the United States.
And I think that this is so important.
Also, the Second Amendment which is totally under siege by people like Hillary Clinton.
Theyll respect the second amendment and what it stands for and what it represents.
 The question was about the supreme court.
I respect the second amendment, but I believe there should be background checks and we should close the gun show loophole and close the online loophole...
 Such a great question because energy is under siege by the Obama administration.
Under absolute siege.
The EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, is killing these energy companies.
And foreign companies are now coming in.
Buying so many of our different plants and then rejiggering the plant, so they take care of their oil.
We are killing, absolutely killing our energy business in this country.
Now I am all for alternative forms of energy including: wind and solar, etc.
But we need much more than wind and solar.
And you look at the miners, Hillary Clinton wants to put the miners out of business.
There is a thing called clean coal.
Coal will last for 1,000 years in this country.
Now we have natural gas, and so other things because of technology, we have unbelievable, we have found over the last seven years, we found tremendous wealth right under our feet.
So good, especially when you have $20 trillion in debt.
I will bring our energy companies back and they will be able to compete and theyll make money and pay off our national debt and budget deficits which are tremendous.
But we are putting our energy companies out of business.
We have to bring back our workers.
You take a look at what's happening to steel and the cost of steel and China dumping vast amounts steel all over the United States, which essentially is killing our steelworkers and steel companies.
We have to guard our energy companies, we have to make it possible.
The EPA is so restrictive that they are putting our energy companies out of business.
And all you have to do is go to a great place like West Virginia or places like Ohio which is phenomenal or places like Pennsylvania and you see what they are doing to the people, miners and others in the energy business.
It's a disgrace.
Its an absolute disgrace.
 Well, that was very interesting.
First of all, China is illegally dumping steel in the United States and Donald Trump is buying it to build his buildings, putting steelworkers and American steel plants out of business.
That's something that I fought against as a senator and something I would have a trade prosecutor to make sure we don't get taken advantage of by China on steel or anything else.
You know because it sounds like you are in the business or youre aware of people in the business.
You know that we are now for the first time energy independent.
We are not dependent on the Middle East, but the Middle East controls a lot of prices.
So the price of oil has been way down and that has a damaging effect on a lot the oil companies, right?
We are however producing a lot of natural gas that serves as a bridge to more renewable fuels and I think that's an important transition.
Weve got to remain energy independent.
It gives us much more power and freedom than to be worried about what goes on in the Middle East.
We have enough worried over there without having to worry about that.
So I have a comprehensive energy policy, but it really does include fighting climate change because I think that is a serious problem.
And I support moving towards more clean renewable energy as quickly as we can.
Because I think we can be the 21st century clean energy superpower and create millions of new jobs and businesses.
But I want to be sure that we don't leave people behind.
Thats why I'm the only candidate from the very beginning of this campaign who had a plan to help us revitalize coal country.
Because those coal miners and their fathers and grandfathers, they dug that coal out, a lot of them lost their lives.
They were injured.
But they turn the lights on and powered our factories.
I don't want to walk away from them.
So weve got to do something for them.
But the price of coal is down worldwide.
We have to look at this comprehensively and that's what I have proposed.
I hope you will go to hillaryclinton.com and read my entire policy.
 Well, I certainly will, because I think that's a very fair and important question.
Well, I respect his children.
His children are incredibly able and devoted and I think that says a lot about Donald.
I don't agree with nearly anything else he says or does, but I do respect that and think that is something that as a mother and a grandmother is very important to me.
So I believe that this election has become in part so conflict-oriented, so intense because there is a lot at stake.
This is not an ordinary time and this is not an ordinary election.
We are going to be choosing a president who will set policy for not just four or eight years, but because some of the important decisions we have to make at home and around the world from the Supreme Court to energy and so much else, and so there is a lot at stake it's one of the most consequential elections that weve had  and that's why I tried to put forth specific policies and plans  trying to get it off of the personal and put it on to what it is on I want to do as president.
And that's why I hope people will check on that for themselves.
So that they can see that yes, I spent 30 years, actually a little more, working to help kids and families and I want to take all that experience to the White House and do that every single day.
 Well, I consider her statement about my children to be a very nice compliment.
I don't know if it was meant to be a compliment, but it is a great...
I'm proud of my children.
They have done a wonderful job and they have been wonderful, wonderful kids.
So I consider that a compliment.
I will say this about Hillary.
She doesn't quit and she doesn't give up.
I respect that.
I tell it like it is.
She is a fighter.
I disagree with much of what she is fighting for, I do disagree with her judgment in many cases, but she does fights hard and doesn't quit and she doesnt give up, and I consider that a very good trait.
 Good evening, Mr. Shadel.
 Good evening, Mr. Shadel.
 Mr. McGee, we have a contractual right to be in Berlin coming out of the conversations at Potsdam and of World War II.
That has been reinforced by direct commitments of the president of the United States; it's been reinforced by a number of other nations under NATO.
I've stated on many occasions that the United States must meet its commitment on Berlin.
It is a commitment that we have to meet if we're going to protect the security of Western Europe.
And therefore on this question I don't think that there is any doubt in the mind of any American; I hope there is not any doubt in the mind of any member of the community of West Berlin; I'm sure there isn't any doubt in the mind of the Russians.
We will meet our commitments to maintain the freedom and independence of West Berlin.
 Yes.
As a matter of fact, the statement that Senator Kennedy made was that - to the effect that there were trigger-happy Republicans, that my stand on Quemoy and Matsu was an indication of trigger-happy Republicans.
I resent that comment.
I resent it because th- it's an implication that Republicans have been trigger-happy and, therefore, would lead this nation into war.
I would remind Senator Kennedy of the past fifty years.
I would ask him to name one Republican president who led this nation into war.
There were three Democratic presidents who led us into war.
I do not mean by that that one party is a war party and the other party is a peace party.
But I do say that any statement to the effect that the Republican party is trigger-happy is belied by the record.
We had a war when we came into power in 1953.
We got rid of that; we've kept out of other wars; and certainly that doesn't indicate that we're trigger-happy.
We've been strong, but we haven't been trigger-happy.
As far as Berlin is concerned, there isn't any question about the necessity of defending Berlin; the rights of people there to be free; and there isn't any question about what the united American people - Republicans and Democrats alike - would do in the event there were an attempt by the Communists to take over Berlin.
 Mr.
Von Fremd, it would be completely irresponsible for a candidate for the presidency, or for a president himself, to indicate the course of action and the weapons he would use in the event of such an attack.
I will say this: in the event that such an attack occurred and in the event the attack was a prelude to an attack on Formosa - which would be the indication today because the Chinese Communists say over and over again that their objective is not the offshore islands, that they consider them only steppingstones to taking Formosa - in the event that their attack then were a prelude to an attack on Formosa, there isn't any question but that the United States would then again, as in the case of Berlin, honor our treaty obligations and stand by our ally of Formosa.
But to indicate in advance how we would respond, to indicate the nature of this response would be incorrect; it would certainly be inappropriate; it would not be in the best interests of the United States.
I will only say this, however, in addition: to do what Senator Kennedy has suggested - to suggest that we will surrender these islands or force our Chinese Nationalist allies to surrender them in advance - is not something that would lead to peace; it is something that would lead, in my opinion, to war.
This is the history of dealing with dictators.
This is something that Senator Kennedy and all Americans must know.
We tried this with Hitler.
It didn't work.
He wanted first uh - we know, Austria, and then he went on to the Sudetenland and then Danzig, and each time it was thought this is all that he wanted.
Now what do the Chinese Communists want?
They don't want just Quemoy and Matsu; they don't want just Formosa; they want the world.
And the question is if you surrender or indicate in advance that you're not going to defend any part of the free world, and you figure that's going to satisfy them, it doesn't satisfy them.
It only whets their appetite; and then the question comes, when do you stop them?
I've often heard President Eisenhower in discussing this question, make the statement that if we once start the process of indicating that this point or that point is not the place to stop those who threaten the peace and freedom of the world, where do we stop them?
And I say that those of us who stand against surrender of territory - this or any others - in the face of blackmail, in the s- face of force by the Communists are standing for the course that will lead to peace.
 Yes.
The whole th- the United States now has a treaty - which I voted for in the United States Senate in 1955 - to defend Formosa and the Pescadores Island.
The islands which Mr. Nixon is discussing are five or four miles, respectively, off the coast of China.
Now when Senator Green, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, wrote to the President, he received back on the second of October, 1958 - "neither you nor any other American need feel the U.S. will be involved in military hostilities merely in the defense of Quemoy and Matsu."
Now, that is the issue.
I believe we must meet our commitment to uh - Formosa.
I support it and the Pescadores Island.
That is the present American position.
The treaty does not include these two islands.
Mr. Nixon suggests uh - that the United States should go to war if these two islands are attacked.
I suggest that if Formosa is attacked or the Pescadores, or if there's any military action in any area which indicates an attack on Formosa and the Pescadores, then of course the United States is at war to defend its treaty.
Now, I must say what Mr. Nixon wants to do is commit us - as I understand him, so that we can be clear if there's a disagreement - he wants us to be committed to the defense of these islands merely as the defense of these islands as free territory, not as part of the defense of Formosa.
Admiral Yarnell, the commander of the Asiatic fleet, has said that these islands are not worth the bones of a single American.
The President of the United States has indicated they are not within the treaty area.
They were not within the treaty area when the treaty was passed in fifty-five.
We have attempted to persuade Chiang Kai-shek as late as January of 1959 to reduce the number of troops he has on them.
This is a serious issue, and I think we ought to understand completely if we disagree, and if so, where.
 Well I think we should st- strengthen our conventional forces, and we should attempt in January, February, and March of next year to increase the airlift capacity of our conventional forces.
Then I believe that we should move full time on our missile production, particularly on Minuteman and on Polaris.
It may be a long period, but we must - we must get started immediately.
Now on the question of disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, I must say that I feel that another effort should be made by a new Administration in January of 1961, to renew negotiations with the Soviet Union and see whether it's possible to come to some conclusion which will lessen the chances of contamination of the atmosphere, and also lessen the chances that other powers will begin to possess a nuclear capacity.
There are indications, because of new inventions, that ten, fifteen, or twenty nations will have a nuclear capacity - including Red China - by the end of the presidential office in 1964.
This is extremely serious.
There have been many wars in the history of mankind.
And to take a chance uh - now be - and not make every effort that we could make to provide for some control over these weapons, I think would be a great mistake.
One of my disagreements with the present Administration has been that I don't feel a real effort has been made an this very sensitive subject, not only of nuclear controls, but also of general disarmament.
Less than a hundred people have been working throughout the entire federal government on this subject, and I believe it's been reflected in our success and failures at Geneva.
Now, we may not succeed.
The Soviet Union may not agree to an inspection system.
We may be able to get satisfactory assurances.
It may be necessary for us to begin testing again.
But I hope the next Administration - and if I have anything to do with it, the next Administration will - make one last great effort to provide for control of nuclear testing, control of nuclear weapons, if possible, control of outer space, free from weapons, and also to begin again the subject of general disarmament levels.
These must be done.
If we cannot succeed, then we must strengthen ourselves.
But I would make the effort because I think the fate not only of our own civilization, but I think the fate of world and the future of the human race is involved in preventing a nuclear war.
 Yes.
I am going to make a major speech on this whole subject next week before the next debate, and I will have an opportunity then to answer any other questions that may arise with regard to my position on it.
There isn't any question but that we must move forward in every possible way to reduce the danger of war; to move toward controlled disarmament; to control tests; but also let's have in mind this: when Senator Kennedy suggests that we haven't been making an effort, he simply doesn't know what he's talking about.
It isn't a question of the number of people who are working in an Administration.
It's a question of who they are.
This has been one of the highest level operations in the whole State Department right under the President himself.
We have gone certainly the extra mile and then some in making offers to the Soviet Union on control of tests, on disarmament, and in every other way.
And I just want to make one thing very clear.
Yes, we should make a great effort.
But under no circumstances must the United States ever make an agreement based on trust.
There must be an absolute guarantee.
Now, just a comment on Senator Kennedy's last answer.
He forgets that in this same debate on the Formosa resolution, which he said he voted for - which he did - that he voted against an amendment, or was recorded against an amendment - and on this particular - or for an amendment, I should say - which passed the Senate overwhelmingly, seventy to twelve.
And that amendment put the Senate of the United States on record with a majority of the Senator's own party voting for it, as well as the majority of Republicans - put them on record - against the very position that the Senator takes now of surrendering, of indicating in advance, that the United States will not defend the offshore islands.
 Well Mr. Drummond, first of all, referring to Secretary Dulles' press conference, I think if you read it all - and I know that you have - you will find that Secretary Dulles also indicated in that press conference that when the troops were withdrawn from Quemoy, that the implication was certainly of everything that he said, that Quemoy could better be defended.
There were too many infantrymen there, not enough heavy artillery; and certainly I don't think there was any implication in Secretary Dulles' statement that Quemoy and Matsu should not be defended in the event that they were attacked, and that attack was a preliminary to an attack on Formosa.
Now as far as President Eisenhower is concerned, I have often heard him discuss this question.
As I uh - related a moment ago, the President has always indicated that we must not make the mistake in dealing with the dictator of indicating that we are going to make a concession at the point of a gun.
Whenever you do that, inevitably the dictator is encouraged to try it again.
So first it will be Quemoy and Matsu, next it may be Formosa.
What do we do then?
My point is this: that once you do this - follow this course of action - of indicating that you are not going to defend a particular area, the inevitable result is that it encourages a man who is determined to conquer the world to press you to the point of no return.
And that means war.
We went through this tragic experience leading to World War II.
We learned our lesson again in Korea, We must not learn it again.
That is why I think the Senate was right, including a majority of the Democrats, a majority of the Republicans, when they rejected Senator Kennedy's position in 1955.
And incidentally, Senator Johnson was among those who rejected that position - voted with the seventy against the twelve.
The Senate was right because they knew the lesson of history.
And may I say, too, that I would trust that Senator Kennedy would change his position on this - change it; because as long as he as a major presidential candidate continues to suggest that we are going to turn over these islands, he is only encouraging the aggressors - the Chinese Communist and the Soviet aggressors - to press the United States, to press us to the point where war would be inevitable.
The road to war is always paved with good intentions.
And in this instance the good intentions, of course, are a desire for peace.
But certainly we're not going to have peace by giving in and indicating in advance that we are not going to defend what has become a symbol of freedom.
 I don't think it's possible for Mr. Nixon to state the record in distortion of the facts with more precision than he just did.
In 1955, Mr. Dulles at a press conference said: "The treaty that we have with the Republic of China excludes Quemoy and Matsu from the treaty area."
That was done with much thought and deliberation.
Therefore that treaty does not commit the United States to defend anything except Formosa and the Pescadores, and to deal with acts against that treaty area.
I completely sustained the treaty.
I voted for it.
I would take any action necessary to defend the treaty, Formosa, and the Pescadores Island.
What we're now talking about is the Vice President's determination to guarantee Quemoy and Matsu, which are four and five miles off the coast of Red China, which are not within the treaty area.
I do not suggest that Chiang Kai-shek - and this Administration has been attempting since 1955 to persuade Chiang Kai-shek to lessen his troop commitments.
Uh - He sent a mission - the President - in 1955 of Mr. uh - Robertson and Admiral Radford.
General Twining said they were still doing it in 1959.
General Ridgway said - who was Chief of Staff: "To go to war for Quemoy and Matsu to me would seem an unwarranted and tragic course to take.
To me that concept is completely repugnant."
So I stand with them.
I stand with the Secretary of State, Mr. Herter, who said these islands were indefensible.
I believe that we should meet our commitments, and if the Chinese Communists attack the Pescadores and Formosa, they know that it will mean a war.
I would not ho- hand over these islands under any point of gun.
But I merely say that the treaty is quite precise and I sustain the treaty.
Mr. Nixon would add a guarantee to islands five miles off the coast of the re- Republic of China when he's never really protested the Communists seizing Cuba, ninety miles off the coast of the United States.
 Well, I must say that uh - Mr. Truman has uh - his methods of expressing things; he's been in politics for fifty years; he's been president of the United States.
They may - are not my style.
But I really don't think there's anything that I could say to President Truman that's going to cause him, at the age of seventy-six, to change his particular speaking manner.
Perhaps Mrs. Truman can, but I don't think I can.
I'll just have to tell Mr. Morton that.
If you'd pass that message on to him.
 Yes, I think so.
Of course, both er - Senator Kennedy and I have felt Mr. Truman's ire; and uh - consequently, I think he can speak with some feeling on this subject.
I just do want to say one thing, however.
We all have tempers; I have one; I'm sure Senator Kennedy has one.
But when a man's president of the United States, or a former president, he has an obligation not to lose his temper in public.
One thing I've noted as I've traveled around the country are the tremendous number of children who come out to see the presidential candidates.
I see mothers holding their babies up, so that they can see a man who might be president of the United States.
I know Senator Kennedy sees them, too.
It makes you realize that whoever is president is going to be a man that all the children of America will either look up to, or will look down to.
And I can only say that I'm very proud that President Eisenhower restored dignity and decency and, frankly, good language to the conduct of the presidency of the United States.
And I only hope that, should I win this election, that I could approach President Eisenhower in maintaining the dignity of the office; in seeing to it that whenever any mother or father talks to his child, he can look at the man in the White House and, whatever he may think of his policies, he will say: "Well, there is a man who maintains the kind of standards personally that I would want my child to follow."
 Well, Mr. Cater, of course it's a criticism that uh - is being made.
Uh - I obviously don't think it's valid.
I have supported the Administration's position and I think that that position has been correct; I think my position has been correct.
As far as Indochina was concerned, I stated over and over again that it was essential during that period that the United States make it clear that we would not tolerate Indochina falling under Communist domination.
Now, as a result of our taking the strong stand that we did, the civil war there was ended; and today, at least in the south of Indochina, the Communists have moved out and we do have a strong, free bastion there.
Now, looking to the U-2 flights, I would like to point out that I have been supporting the President's position throughout.
I think the President was correct in ordering these flights.
I think the President was correct, certainly, in his decision to continue the flights while the conference was going on.
I noted, for example, in reading a - uh - a - a particular discussion that Senator Kennedy had with Dave Garroway shortly after the uh - his statement about regrets, that uh - he made the statement that he felt that these particular flights uh - were ones that shouldn't have occurred right at that time, and the indication was how would Mr. Khrushchev had felt if we had uh - had a flight over the uni- how would we have felt if Mr. Khrushchev ha - uh - had a flight over the United States while uh - he was visiting here.
And the answer, of course, is that Communist espionage goes on all the time.
The answer is that the United States can't afford to have a es- an es - a espionage lack or should we s- uh - lag - or should I say uh - an intelligence lag - any more than we can afford to have a missile lag.
Now, referring to your question with regard to Quemoy and Matsu.
What I object to here is the constant reference to surrendering these islands.
Senator Kennedy quotes the record, which he read from a moment ago, but what he forgets to point out is that the key vote - a uh - vote which I've referred to several times - where he was in the minority was one which rejected his position.
Now, why did they reject it?
For the very reason that those Senators knew, as the President of the United States knew, that you should not indicate to the Communists in advance that you're going to surrender an area that's free.
Why?
Because they know as Senator Kennedy will have to know that if you do that you encourage them to more aggression.
 Well number one on Indochina, Mr. Nixon talked in - before the newspaper editors in the spring of 1954 about putting, and I quote him, "American boys into Indochina."
The reason Indochina was preserved was the result of the Geneva Conference which Indochina.
Number two, on the question of the U-2 flights.
I thought the.
U-2 flight in May just before the conference was a mistake in timing because of the hazards involved, if the summit conference had any hope for success.
I never criticized the U-2 flights in general, however.
I never suggested espionage should stop.
It still goes on, I would assume, on both sides.
Number three, the Vice President - on May fifteenth after the U-2 flight - indicated that the flights were going on, even though the Administration and the President had canceled the flights on May twelfth.
Number three, the pre - Vice President suggests that we should keep the Communists in doubt about whether we would fight on Quemoy and Matsu.
That's not the position he's taking.
He's indicating that we should fight for these islands come what may because they are, in his words, in the area of freedom.
He didn't take that position on Tibet.
He didn't take that position on Budapest.
He doesn't take that position that I've seen so far in Laos.
Guinea and Ghana have both moved within the Soviet sphere of influence in foreign policy; so has Cuba.
I merely say that the United States should meet its commitments to Que- to uh - Formosa and the Pescadores.
But as Admiral Yarnell has said, and he's been supported by most military authority, these islands that we're now talking about are not worth the bones of a single American soldier; and I know how difficult it is to sustain troops close to the shore under artillery bombardment.
And therefore, I think, we should make it very clear the disagreement between Mr. Nixon and myself.
He's extending the Administration's commitment.
 Well the que- the - Mr. Griffin, I believe, who is the head of the Klan, who lives in Tampa, Florida, indicated a - in a statement, I think, two or three weeks ago that he was not going to vote for me, and that he was going to vote for Mr. Nixon.
I do not suggest in any way, nor have I ever, that that indicates that Mr. Nixon has the slightest sympathy, involvement, or in any way imply any inferences in regard to the Ku Klux Klan.
That's absurd.
I don't suggest that, I don't support it.
I would disagree with it.
Mr. Nixon knows very well that in this - in this whole matter that's been involved with the so-called religious discussion in this campaign, I've never suggested, even by the vaguest implication, that he did anything but disapprove it.
And that's my view now.
I disapprove of the issue.
I do not suggest that Mr. Nixon does in any way.
 Well I welcome this opportunity to join Senator Kennedy completely on that statement and to say before this largest television audience in history something that I have been saying in the past and want to - will always say in the future.
On our last television debate, I pointed out that it was my position that Americans must choose the best man that either party could produce.
We can't settle for anything but the best.
And that means, of course, the best man that this nation can produce.
And that means that we can't have any test of religion.
We can't have any test of race.
It must be a test of a man.
Also as far as religion is concerned.
I have seen Communism abroad.
I see what it does.
Communism is the enemy of all religions; and we who do believe in God must join together.
We must not be divided on this issue.
The worst thing that I can think can happen in this campaign would be for it to be decided on religious issues.
I obviously repudiate the Klan; I repudiate anybody who uses the religious issue; I will not tolerate it, I have ordered all of my people to have nothing to do with it and I say - say to this great audience, whoever may be listening, remember, if you believe in America, if you want America to set the right example to the world, that we cannot have religious or racial prejudice.
We cannot have it in our hearts.
But we certainly cannot have it in a presidential campaign.
 Mr. McGee, I am planning a speech on that subject next week.
Uh - Also, so that we can get the uh - opportunity for the questioners to question me, it will be before the next television debate.
Uh - I will say simply, in advance of it, that I believe that in this area, the laws which should be passed uh - as far as the big national emergency strikes are concerned, are ones that will give the president more weapons with which to deal with those strikes.
Now, I have a basic disagreement with Senator Kennedy, though, on this point.
He has taken the position, when he first indicated in October of last year, that he would even favor compulsory arbitration as one of the weapons the president might have to stop a national emergency strike.
I understand in his last speech before the Steelworkers Union, that he changed that position and indicated that he felt that government seizure might be the best way to stop a strike which could not be settled by collective bargaining.
I do not believe we should have either compulsory arbitration or seizure.
I think the moment that you give to the union, on the one side, and to management, on the other side, the escape hatch of eventually going to government to get it settled, that most of these great strikes will end up being settled by government, and that will be a - be in the end, in my opinion, wage control; it would mean price control - all the things that we do not want.
I do believe, however, that we can give to the president of the United States powers, in addition to what he presently has in the fact finding area, which would enable him to be more effective than we have been in handling these strikes.
One last point I should make.
The record in handling them has been very good during this Administration.
We have had less man-hours lost by strikes in these last seven years than we had in the previous seven years, by a great deal.
And I only want to say that however good the record is, it's got to be better.
Because in this critical year - period of the sixties we've got to move forward, all Americans must move forward together, and we have to get the greatest cooperation possible between labor and management.
We cannot afford stoppages of massive effect on the economy when we're in the terrible competition we're in with the Soviets.
 Well, I always have difficulty recognizing my positions when they're stated by the Vice President.
I never suggested that compulsory arbitration was the solution for national emergency disputes.
I'm opposed to that, was opposed to it in October, 1958.
I have suggested that the president should be given other weapons to protect the national interest in case of national emergency strikes beyond the injunction provision of the Taft-Hartley Act.
I don't know what other weapons the Vice President is talking about.
I'm talking about giving him four or five tools - not only the fact-finding committee that he now has under the injunction provision, not only the injunction, but also the power of the fact-finding commission to make recommendations - recommendations which would not be binding, but nevertheless would have great force of public opinion behind them.
One of the additional powers that I would suggest would be seizure.
There might be others.
By the president having five powers - four or five powers - and he only has very limited powers today, neither the company nor the union would be sure which power would be used; and therefore, there would be a greater incentive on both sides to reach an agreement themselves without taking it to the government.
The difficulty now is the president's course is quite limited.
He can set up a fact-finding committee.
The fact-finding committee's powers are limited.
He can provide an injunction if there's a national emergency for eighty days, then the strike can go on; and there are no other powers or actions that the president could take unless he went to the Congress.
This is a difficult and sensitive matter.
But to state my view precisely, the president should have a variety of things he could do.
He could leave the parties in doubt as to which one he would use; and therefore there would be incentive, instead of as now - the steel companies were ready to take the strike because they felt the injunction of eighty days would break the union, which didn't happen.
 Yes, I have stated in both uh - debates and state again that I believe in a balanced budget and have supported that concept during my fourteen years in the Congress.
The only two times when an unbalanced budget is warranted would be during a serious recession - and we had that in fifty-eight in an unbalanced budget of twelve billion dollars - or a national emergency where there should be large expenditures for national defense, which we had in World War II and uh - during part of the Korean War.
On the question of the cost of our budget, I have stated that it's my best judgment that our agricultural program will cost a billion and a half, possibly two billion dollars less than the present agricultural program.
My judgment is that the program the Vice President put forward, which is an extension of Mr. Benson's program, will cost a billion dollars more than the present program, which costs about six billion dollars a year, the most expensive in history.
We've spent more money on agriculture in the last eight years than the hundred years of the Agricultural Department before that.
Secondly, I believe that the high interest-rate policy that this Administration has followed has added about three billion dollars a year to interest on the debt - merely funding the debt - which is a burden an the taxpayers.
I would hope, under a different monetary policy, that it would be possible to reduce that interest-rate burden, at least a billion dollars.
Third, I think it's possible to gain a seven hundred million to a billion dollars through tax changes which I believe would close up loof- loopholes on dividend withholding, on expense accounts.
Fourthly, I have suggested that the medical care for the aged - and the bill which the Congress now has passed and the President signed if fully implemented would cost a billion dollars on the Treasury - out of Treasury funds and a billion dollars by the states - the proposal that I have put forward and which many of the members of my party support is for medical care financed under Social Security; which would be financed under the Social Security taxes; which is less than three cents a day per person for medical care, doctors' bills, nurses, hospitals, when they retire.
It is actuarially sound.
So in my judgment we would spend more money in this Administration on aid to education, we'd spend more money on housing, we'd spend more money and I hope more wisely on defense than this Administration has.
But I believe that the next Administration should work for a balanced budget, and that would be my intention.
Mr. Nixon misstates my figures constantly, which uh - is of course his right, but the fact of the matter is: here is where I stand and I just want to have it on the public record.
 Senator Kennedy has indicated on several occasions in this program tonight that I have been misstating his record and his figures.
I will issue a white paper after this broadcast, quoting exactly what he said on compulsory arbitration, for example, and the record will show that I have been correct.
Now as far as his figures are concerned here tonight, he again is engaging in this, what I would call, mirror game of "here-it-is-and-here-it-isn't."
Uh - On the one hand, for example, he suggests that as far as his medical care program is concerned that that really isn't a problem because it's from Social Security.
But Social Security is a tax.
The people pay it.
It comes right out of your paycheck.
This doesn't mean that the people aren't going to be paying the bill.
He also indicates as far as his agricultural program is concerned that he feels it will cost less than ours.
Well, all that I can suggest is that all the experts who have studied the program indicate that it is the most fantastic program, the worst program, insofar as its effect on the farmers, that the - America has ever had foisted upon it in an election year or any other time.
And I would also point out that Senator Kennedy left out a part of the cost of that program - a twenty-five percent rise in food prices that the people would have to pay.
Now are we going to have that when it isn't going to help the farmers?
I don't think we should have that kind of a program.
Then he goes on to say that he's going to change the interest-rate situation and we're going to get some more money that way.
Well, what he is saying there in effect, we're going to have inflation.
We're going to go right back to what we had under Mr. Truman when he had political control of the Federal Reserve Board.
I don't believe we ought to pay our bills through inflation, through a phony interest rate.
 Mr. Drummond, I am never satisfied with the economic growth of this country.
I'm not satisfied with it even if there were no Communism in the world, but particularly when we're in the kind of a race we're in, we have got to see that America grows just as fast as we can, provided we grow soundly.
Because even though we have maintained, as I pointed out in our first debate, the absolute gap over the Soviet Union; even though the growth in this Administration has been twice as much as it was in the Truman Administration; that isn't good enough.
Because America must be able to grow enough not only to take care of our needs at home for better education and housing and health - all these things we want.
We've got to grow enough to maintain the forces that we have abroad and to wage the non-military battle for the war - uh - for the world in Asia, in Africa and Latin America.
It's going to cost more money, and growth will help us to win that battle.
Now, what do we do about it?
And here I believe basically that what we have to do is to stimulate that sector of America, the private enterprise sector of the economy, in which there is the greatest possibility for expansion.
So that is why I advocate a program of tax reform which will stimulate more investment in our economy.
In addition to that, we have to move on other areas that are holding back growth.
I refer, for example, to distressed areas.
We have to move into those areas with programs so that we make adequate use of the resources of those areas.
We also have to see that all of the people of the United States - the tremendous talents that our people have - are used adequately.
That's why in this whole area of civil rights, the equality of opportunity for employment and education is not just for the benefit of the minority groups, it's for the benefit of the nation so that we can get the scientists and the engineers and all the rest that we need.
And in addition to that, we need programs, particularly in higher education, which will stimulate scientific breakthroughs which will bring more growth.
Now what all this, of course, adds up to is this: America has not been standing still.
Let's get that straight.
Anybody who says America's been standing still for the last seven and a half years hasn't been traveling around America.
He's been traveling in some other country.
We have been moving.
We have been moving much faster than we did in the Truman years.
But we can and must move faster, and that's why I stand so strongly for programs that will move America forward in the sixties, move her forward so that we can stay ahead of the Soviet Union and win the battle for freedom and peace.
 Well first may I correct a statement which was made before, that under my agricultural program food prices would go up twenty-five percent.
That's untrue.
The fa- the farmer who grows wheat gets about two and a half cents out of a twenty-five-cent loaf of bread.
Even if you put his income up ten percent, that would be two and three-quarters percent three pers- or three cents out of that twenty-five cents.
The t- man who grows tomatoes - it costs less for those tomatoes than it does for the label on the can.
And I believe when the average hour for many farmers' wage is about fifty cents an hour, he should do better.
But anybody who suggests that that program would c- come to any figure indicated by the Vice President is in error.
The Vice President suggested a number of things.
He suggested that we aid distressed areas.
The Administration has vetoed that bill passed by the Congress twice.
He suggested we pass an aid to education bill.
But the Administration and the Republican majority in the Congress has opposed any realistic aid to education.
And the Vice President cast the deciding vote against federal aid for teachers' salaries in the Senate, which prevented that being added.
This Administration and this country last year had the lowest rate of economic growth - which means jobs - of any major industrialized society in the world in 1959.
And when we have to find twenty-five thousand new jobs a week for the next ten years, we're going to have to grow more.
Governor Rockefeller says five per cent.
The Democratic platform and others say five per cent.
Many say four and a half per cent.
The last eight years the average growth has been about two and a half per cent.
That's why we don't have full employment today.
 Uh - Mr. McGee, there are about a hundred and four commodities that have some kind of depletion allowance - different kind of minerals, including oil.
I believe all of those should be gone over in detail to make sure that no one is getting a tax break; to make sure that no one is getting away from paying the taxes he ought to pay.
That includes oil; it includes all kinds of minerals; it includes everything within the range of taxation.
We want to be sure it's fair and equitable.
It includes oil abroad.
Perhaps that oil abroad should be treated differently than the oil here at home.
Now the oil industry recently has had hard times.
Particularly some of the smaller producers.
They're moving about eight or nine days in Texas.
But I can assure you that if I'm elected president, the whole spectrum of taxes will be gone through carefully.
And if there is any inequities in oil or any other commodity, then I would vote to close that loophole, I have voted in the past to reduce the depletion allowance for the largest producers; for those from five million dollars down, to maintain it at twenty-seven and a half per cent.
I believe we should study this and other allowances; tax expense, dividend expenses and all the rest, and make a determination of how we can stimulate growth; how we can provide the revenues needed to move our country forward.
 Senator Kennedy's position and mine completely different on this.
I favor the present depletion allowance.
I favor it not because I want to make a lot of oil men rich, but because I want to make America rich.
Why do we have a depletion allowance?
Because this is the stimulation, the incentive for companies to go out and explore for oil, to develop it.
If we didn't have a depletion allowance of certainly, I believe, the present amount, we would have our oil exploration cut substantially in this country.
Now, as far as my position then is concerned, it is exactly opposite to the Senator's.
And it's because of my belief that if America is going to have the growth that he talks about and that I talk about and that we want, the thing to do is not to discourage individual enterprise, not to discourage people to go out and discover more oil and minerals, but to encourage them.
And so he would be doing exactly the wrong thing.
One other thing.
He suggests that there are a number of other items in this whole depletion field that could be taken into account.
He also said a moment ago that we would get more money to finance his programs by revising the tax laws, including depletion.
I should point out that as far as depletion allowances are concerned, the oil depletion allowance is one that provides eighty percent of all of those involved in depletion, so you're not going to get much from revenue insofar as depletion allowances are concerned, unless you move in the area that he indicated.
But I oppose it.
I oppose it for the reasons that I mentioned.
I oppose it because I want us to have more oil exploration and not less.
 Well, Mr.
Von Fremd, the first thing we have to do is to continue to keep confidence abroad in the American dollar.
That means that we must continue to have a balanced budget here at home in every possible circumstance that we can; because the moment that we have loss of confidence in our own fiscal policies at home, it results in gold flowing out.
Secondly, we have to increase our exports, as compared with our imports.
And here we have a very strong program going forward in the Department of Commerce.
This one must be stepped up.
Beyond that, as far as the gold supply is concerned, and as far as the movement of gold is concerned, uh - we have to bear in mind that we must get more help from our allies abroad in this great venture in which all free men are involved of winning the battle for freedom.
Now America has been carrying a tremendous load in this respect.
I think we have been right in carrying it.
I have favored our programs abroad for economic assistance and for military assistance.
But now we find that the countries of Europe for example, that we have aided, and Japan, that we've aided in the Far East; these countries - some our former enemies, have now recovered completely.
They have got to bear a greater share of this load of economic assistance abroad.
That's why I am advocating, and will develop during the course of the next Administration - if, of course, I get the opportunity - a program in which we enlist more aid from these other countries on a concerted basis in the programs of economic development for Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The United States cannot continue to carry the major share of this burden by itself.
We can a big share of it, but we've got to have more help from our friends abroad; and these three factors, I think, will be very helpful in reversing the gold flow which you spoke about.
 Just to uh - correct the record, Mr. Nixon said on depletion that his record was the opposite of mine.
What I said was that this matter should be thoroughly gone into to make sure that there aren't loopholes.
If his record is the opposite of that, that means that he doesn't want to go into it.
Now on the question of gold.
The difficulty, of course, is that we do have heavy obligations abroad, that we therefore have to maintain not only a favorable balance of trade but also send a good deal of our dollars overseas to pay our troops, maintain our bases, and sustain other economies.
In other words, if we're going to continue to maintain our position in the sixties, we have to maintain a sound monetary and fiscal policy.
We have to have control over inflation, and we also have to have a favorable balance of trade.
We have to be able to compete in the world market.
We have to be able to sell abroad more than we consume uh - from abroad if we're going to be able to meet our obligations.
In addition, many of the countries around the world still keep restrictions against our goads, going all the way back to the days when there was a dollar shortage.
Now there isn't a dollar shortage, and yet many of these countries continue to move against our goods.
I believe that we must be able to compete in the market - steel and in all the basic commodities abroad - we must be able to compete against them because we always did because of our technological lead.
We have to be sure to maintain that.
We have to persuade these other countries not to restrict our goods coming in, not to act as if there was a dollar gap; and third, we have to persuade them to assume some of the responsibilities that up till now we've maintained, to assist underdeveloped countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia make an economic breakthrough on their own.
 Well, I think there are many uh - tests, Mr. Drummond, of prestige.
And the significance of prestige, really, is because we're so identified with the cause of freedom.
Therefore, if we are on the mount, if we are rising, if our influence is spreading, if our prestige is spreading, then those uh - who stand now on the razor edge of decision between us or between the Communist system, wondering whether they should use the system of freedom to develop their countries or the system of Communism, they'll be persuaded to follow our example.
There have been several indications that our prestige is not as high as it once was.
Mr. George Allen, the head of our information service, said that a result of our being second in space, in the sputnik in 1957, and I quote him, I believe I paraphrase him accurately.
He said that many of these countries equate space developments with scientific productivity and scientific advancement.
And therefore, he said, many of these countries now feel that the Soviet Union, which was once so backward, is now on a par with the United States.
Secondly, the economic growth of the Soviet Union is greater than ours.
Mr. Dulles has suggested it's from two to three times as great as ours.
This has a great effect on the s- underdeveloped world, which faces problems of low income and high population density and inadequate resources.
Three, a Gallup Poll taken in February asked people in ten countries which country they thought would be first in 1970, both scientifically and militarily.
And a majority in every country except Greece, felt that it would be the Soviet Union by l970.
Four, in the votes at the U.N., particularly the vote dealing with Red China last Saturday, we received the support on the position that we had taken of only two African countries - one, Liberia, which had been tied to us for more than a century, and the other, Union of South Africa, which is not a popular country in Africa.
Every other ca- African country either abstained or voted against us.
A - More countries voted against us in Asia on this issue than voted with us.
On the neutralists' resolution, which we were so much opposed to, the same thing happened.
The candidate who was a candidate for the president of Brazil, took a trip to Cuba to call on Mr. Castro during the election in order to get the benefit of the Castro supporters uh - within Brazil.
There are many indications.
Guinea and Ghana, two independent countries within the last three years - Guinea in fifty-seven, Ghana within the last eighteen months - both now are supporting the Soviet foreign policy at the U.N. Mr. Herter said so himself.
Laos is moving in that direction.
So I would say our prestige is not so high.
No longer do we give the image of being on the rise.
No longer do we give an image of vitality.
 Well, I would say first of all that Senator's - Kennedy's statement that he's just made is not going to help our Gallup Polls abroad and it isn't going to help our prestige either.
Let's look at the other side of the coin.
Let's look at the vote on the Congo, the vote was seventy to nothing against the Soviet Union.
Let's look at the situation with regard to economic growth as it really is.
We find that the Soviet Union is a very primitive economy.
Its growth rate is not what counts; it's whether it is catching up with us and it is not catching up with us.
We're well ahead and we can stay ahead, provided we have confidence in America and don't run her down in order to build her up.
We could look also at other items which Senator Kennedy has named, but I will only conclude by saying this: in this whole matter of prestige, in the final analysis, its whether you stand for what's right.
And getting back to this matter that we discussed at the outset, the matter of Quemoy and Matsu.
I can think of nothing that will be a greater blow to the prestige of the United States among the free nations in Asia than for us to take Senator Kennedy's advan- advice to go - go against what a majority of the members of the Senate, both Democrat and Republican, did - said in 1955, and to say in advance we will surrender an area to the Communists.
In other words, if the United States is going to maintain its strength and its prestige, we must not only be strong militarily and economically, we must be firm diplomatically.
Thi- Certainly we have been speaking, I know, of whether we should have retreat or defeat.
Let's remember the way to win is not to retreat and not to surrender.
 Mr. Kraft, I believe that the American people, in the next four years under a Ford administration, will be called upon to make those necessary sacrifices to preserve the peace which we have.
Which means, of course, that uh - we will have to maintain an adequate military capability - which means, of course, that we will have to add a uh - I think uh - a few billion dollars to our defense appropriations to make certain that we have adequate uh -strategic forces - adequate conventional forces.
I think the American people will be called upon to uh - uh - be in the forefront in giving leadership to the solution of those problems that must be solved in the Middle East, in southern Africa, and any problems that might arise in the Pacific.
The American people will be called upon to tighten their belts a bit in meeting some of the problems that we face domestically.
I don't think that uh - America can go on a big spending spree with a whole lot of new programs uh - that would add significantly to the federal budget.
I believe that the American people, if given the leadership that I would expect to give, would be willing to give this thrust to preserve the peace and the necessary restraint at home to hold the lid on spending so that we could, I think, have a long overdue and totally justified tax decrease for the middle-income people.
And then, with the economy that would be generated from a restraint on spending, and a tax uh reduction primarily for the middle-income people, then I think the American people would be willing to make those sacrifices for peace and prosperity in the next uh - four years.
 Surely, surely, overlapping.
Doesn't your policy really imply that we're going to have a fairly high rate of unemployment over a fairly long time, that growth is gonna be fairly slow, and that we're not gonna be able to do much - very much in the next four or five years to meet the basic agenda of our national needs in the cities, in health, uh in transit and a whole lot of things like that.
 Not at all.
overlapping, aren't those the real costs?
 No, Mr. Kraft, we're spending very significant amounts of money now, some $200 billion a year, almost 50 percent of our total federal expenditure uh - by the federal government at the present time for human needs.
Now we will probably need to increase that to same extent.
But we don't have to have - growth in spending that will blow the lid off and add to the problems of inflation.
I believe we can meet the problems within the cities of this country and still uh - give a tax reduction.
I proposed, as you know, a reduction to increase the personal exemption from seven hundred and fifty to a thousand dollars.
With the fiscal program that I have, and if you look at the projections, it shows that we will reduce unemployment, that we will continue to win the battle against inflation, and at the same time give the kind of quality of life that I believe is possible in America.
Uh - a job, a home for all those that'll work and save for it, uh - safety in the streets, uh - health that is a - health care that is affordable.
These things can be done if we have the right vision and the right restraint and the right leadership.
 Well I might say first of all that I think in case of the Carter administration the sacrifices would be much less.
Mr. Ford's own uh - environmental agency has projected a 10 percent unemployment rate by 1978 if he's uh - president.
The American people are ready to make sacrifices if they are part of the process.
If they know that they will be helping to make decisions and won't be excluded from being an involved party to the national purpose.
The major effort we must put forward is to put our people back to work.
And I think that this uh - is one example where uh - a lot of people have selfish, grasping ideas now.
I remember 1973 in the depth of the uh - energy crisis when President Nixon called on the American people to make a sacrifice, to cut down on the waste of uh - gasoline, to cut down on the uh - speed of automobiles.
It was a - a tremendous surge of patriotism, that "I want to make a sacrifice for my country."
I think we uh - could call together, with strong leadership in the White House, business, industry and labor, and say let's have voluntary price restraints.
Let's lay down some guidelines so we don't have continuing inflation.
We can also have a- an end to the extremes.
We now have one extreme for instance, of some welfare recipients, who by taking advantage of the welfare laws, the housing laws, the uh - Medicaid uh - laws, and the uh - food stamp laws, make over $10 thousand a year and uh - they don't have to pay any taxes on it.
At the other extreme, uh - just 1 percent of the richest people in our country derive 25 percent of all the tax benefits.
So both those extremes grasp for advantage and the person who has to pay that expense is the middle-income family who's still working for a living and they have to pay for the rich who have privilege, and for the poor who are not working.
But I think uh - uh - a balanced approach, with everybody being part of it and a striving for unselfishness, could help as it did in 1973 to let people sacrifice for their own country.
I know I'm ready for it.
I think the American people are too.
 I think the major reason for a decrease in participation that we have experienced ever since 1960 has been the deep discouragement of the American people about the performance of public officials.
When you've got seven and a half, eight million people out of work, and you've got three times as much inflation as you had during the last eight-year Democratic administration, when you have the highest deficits in history; when you have it uh - becoming increasingly difficult far a family to put a child through college or to own a home, there's a natural inclination to be turned off.
Also, in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia and uh - Watergate and uh - the CIA revelations, people have feel - have felt that they've uh been betrayed by public officials, I have to admit that in the uh - heat of the campaign - I've been in thirty primaries during the springtime, I've been campaigning for twenty-two months - I've made some mistakes.
And I think this is uh - uh - part of uh - of just being a human being.
I - I have to say that my campaign has been an open one.
And uh - the Playboy thing has been of great - very great concern to me.
I don't know how to deal with it exactly.
Uh - I uh - agreed to give the interview uh - to Playboy Other people have done it who are notable - uh - Governor Jerry Brown, uh - Walter Cronkite, uh - Albert Schweitzer, Mr. Ford's own secretary of the treasury, Mr. Simon, uh - William Buckley - many other people.
But they weren't running for president, and in retrospect, from hindsight, I would not have given that uh - interview had I do it - had it - I to do it over again.
If I should ever decide in the future to discuss my - my deep Christian beliefs and uh - condemnation and sinfulness, I'll use another forum besides Playboy.
But I can say this, uh - I'm doing the best I can to get away from that, and during the next ten days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running uh - television advertisements and newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford's character.
I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford's campaign, and uh - I hope that we can leave those issues in this next ten days about personalities and mistakes of the past - we've both made some mistakes - and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people.
I regret the things in my own long campaign that have been mistaken, but I'm trying to do away with those the last ten days.
 I believe that the uh - American people have been turned off in this election, uh - Mr. Maynard, for a variety of reasons.
We have seen on Capitol Hill, in the Congress, uh - a great many uh - allegations of wrong-doing, of uh - alleged immorality, uh - those are very disturbing to the American people.
They wonder how an elected representative uh - can serve them and participate in such activities uh - serving in the Congress of the United States.
Yes, and I'm certain many, many Americans were turned off by the revelations of Watergate, a very, very uh - bad period of time in American political history.
Yes, and thousands, maybe millions of Americans were turned off because of the uh - problems that came out of our involvement in Vietnam.
But on the other hand, I found on July fourth of this year, a new spirit born in America.
We were celebrating our Bicentennial; and I find that uh - there is a - a movement as I travel around the country of greater interest in this campaign.
Now, like uh - any hardworking uh - person seeking public office uh - in the campaign, inevitably sometimes you will use uh - rather graphic language and I'm guilty of that just like I think most others in the political arena.
But I do make a pledge that in the next ten days when we're asking the American people to make one of the most important decisions in their lifetime, because I think this election is one of the mast vital in the history of America, that uh - we do together what we can to stimulate voter participation.
 Well, Mr. uh - Nelson, uh - I testified before two committees, House and Senate, on precisely the questions that you have asked.
And the testimony under oath was to the effect that I did not talk to Mr. Nixon, to Mr. Haldeman, to Mr. Ehrlichman, or to any of the people at the White House.
I said I had no recollection whatsoever of talking with any of the White House legislative liaison people.
I indicated under oath that the initiative that I took was at the request of the ranking members of the House Banking and Currency Committee on the Republican side, which was a legitimate request and a proper response by me.
Now that was gone into by two congressional committees, and following that investigation, both committees overwhelmingly approved me, and the House and the Senate did likewise.
Now, in the meantime, the special prosecutor, within the last few days, after an investigation himself, said there was no reason for him to get involved because he found nothing that would justify it.
And then just a day or two ago, the attorney general of the United States made a further investigation and came to precisely the same conclusion.
Now, after all of those investigations by objective, responsible people, I think the matter is closed once and for all.
But to add one other feature, I don't control any of the tapes.
Those tapes are in the jurisdiction of the courts and I have no right to say "yes" or "no."
But all the committees, the attorney general, the special prosecutor, all of them have given me a clean bill of health.
I think the matter is settled once and for all.
 That's for the uh - proper authorities who have control over those tapes to make that decision.
I have given every bit of evidence, answered every question that's as- been asked me by any senator or any member of the House.
Plus the fact, that the special prosecutor, on his own initiation, and the attorney general on his initiation, the highest law enforcement official in this country, all of them have given me a clean bill of health.
And I've told everything I know about it.
I think the matter is settled once and for all.
 I don't have a response.
 In the last uh - two weeks, I've had a chance to talk to uh - two men who have visited uh - the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and China.
One is Governor Avell- Averell Harriman, who visited the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and the other is James Schlesinger, whom I think you accompanied to uh - China.
I got a- a complete report back from those countries from these two distinguished - uh - gentlemen.
Mr. Harriman talked to the leaders in Yugoslavia, and I think it's accurate to say that there is no uh - prospect in their opinion, of the Soviet Union invading uh - Yugoslavia should uh - Mr. Tito pass away.
The present leadership uh - there is uh - is fairly uniform in - in their purpose, and I think it's a close-knit group, uh - and uh - I think it would be unwise for us to say that we will go to war uh - in Yugoslavia uh - if the Soviets should invade, which I think would be an extremely unlikely thing.
I have maintained from the very beginning of my campaign, and this was a standard answer that I made in response to the Yugoslavian question, that I would never uh - go to war or become militarily involved, in the internal affairs of another country unless our own security was direc- rectly threatened.
And uh - I don't believe that our security would be directly threatened if the Soviet Union went uh - into Yugoslavia.
I don't believe it will happen.
I certainly hope it won't.
I would take eh - the strongest possible measures short of uh - actual military uh - action there by our own troops, but I doubt that that would be an eventuality.
 No, I did not.
 I firmly believe, uh - Mr. Kraft, that it's unwise for a president to signal in advance what uh - options he might exercise if any uhh - international problem arose.
I think we all recall with some sadness that at uh - the period of the nin- late nineteen forties, early nineteen fifties, there were some indications that the United States would not include uh - South Korea in an area of defense.
There are some who allege, I can't prove it true or untrue, that uh - such a statement uh - in effect invited the North Koreans to invade South Korea.
It's a fact they did.
But no president of the United States, in my opinion, should signal in advance to a prospective enemy, what his uhh - decision might be or what option he might exercise.
It's far better for a person sitting in the White House uh - who has a number of options to make certain that the uh - other side, so to speak, doesn't know precisely what you're going to do.
And therefore, that was the reason that I would not uh - identify any particular course of action uh - when I responded to a question a week or so ago.
 I have indicated to General Brown that uh - the words that he used in that interview, in that particular case and in several others, were very ill advised.
And General Brown has indicated uh - his apology, his regrets, and I think that will, uh - in this situation, settle the matter.
It is tragic that uh - the full transcript of that interview was not released and that there were excerpts, some of the excerpts, taken out of context.
Not this one, however, that you bring up.
General Brown has an exemply [sic] record of military performance.
He served this nation with great, great skill and courage and bravery for thirty-five years.
And I think it's the consensus of the people who are knowledgeable in the military field, that he is probably the outstanding military leader and strategist that we have in America today.
Now he did use uh - ill-advised words, but I think in the fact that he apologized, that he was reprimanded, uh - does permit him to stay on and continue that kind of leadership that's we so badly need as we enter into uh - negotiations uh - under the SALT II agreement, or if we have operations that might be developing uh in the Middle East or southern Africa, in the Pacific, uh - we need a man with that experience, that knowledge, that know-how, and I think, in light of the fact that he has uh - apologized, uh - would not have justified my asking for his resignation.
 Well, just briefly, I - I think this is uh - the second time that General Brown has made a statement that - for which he did have to apologize.
And I know that everybody uh - makes mistakes.
I think the first one was related to uh - the unwarranted influence of American Jews on the media and uh - in the Congress.
This one concerned uh - Great Britain.
I think he said that Israel was a - a military burden on us and that Iran hoped to reestablish the Persian Empire.
Ah - I'm not uh - sure that I remembered earlier that President Ford had - had expressed uh - his concern about the statement or apologized for it.
This is uh - something, though, that I think uh - is indicative of the need among the American people to know how its commander-in-chief, the president, feels and - and - and I think the only criticism that I would have uh - on - of Mr. Ford is that uh - immediately when the statement was re - re - revealed, uh - perhaps a - a statement from the president would have been a clarifying and a very beneficial thing.
 I don't believe it does.
Uh - I began campaigning uh - twenty-two months ago.
At that time, nobody thought I had a chance to win.
Uh - very few people knew who I was.
I came from a tiny town, as you know, Plains, and didn't hold public office, didn't have very much money.
And my first organization was just four or five people plus my wife and my children, my three sons and their wives.
And we won the nomination by going out into the streets - barbershops, beauty parlors, restaurants, stores, in factory shift lines also in farmers' markets and livestock sale barns - and we talked a lot and we listened a lot and we learned from the American people.
And we built up uh - an awareness among the uh - voters of this country, particularly those in whose primaries I entered - thirty of them, nobody's ever done that before - about who I was and what I stood for.
Now we have a very, very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics, and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization.
I'd say, several hundred of them.
And they're very fine and very highly qualified.
The one major decision that I have made since acquiring the nomination, and I share this with President Ford, is the choice of a vice president.
I think this should be indicative of the kind of leaders I would choose to help me if I am elected.
I chose Senator Walter Mondale.
And the only criterion I ever put forward in my own mind was who among the several million people in this country would be the best person qualified to be president, if something should happen to me and to join me in being vice president if I should serve out my term.
And I'm convinced now, more than I was when I got the nomination, that Walter Mondale was the right choice, And I believe this is a good indication of the kind of people I would choose in the future.
Mr. Ford has had that same choice to make.
I don't want to say anything critical of Senator Dole, but I've never heard Mr. Ford say that that was his prim- primary consideration - Who is the best person I could choose in this country to be president of the United States?
I feel completely at ease knowing that someday Senator Mondale might very well be president.
In the last five pres- vice presidential uh - nominees, uh - incumbents, three of them have become president.
But I think this is indicative of what I would do.
 The Governor may not have heard my uh - established criteria for the selection of a vice president, but uh - it was a well-established criteria that the person I selected would be fully qualified to be president of the United States.
And Senator Bob Dole is so qualified: sixteen years in the House of Representatives and in the Senate, uhh - very high responsibilities on important committees.
I don't mean to be critical of uh - Senator Mondale, but uh - I was uh - very, very surprised when I read that uh - Senator Mondale made a very derogatory, very personal comment about General Brown uh - after the news story that uh - broke about General Brown.
If my recollection is correct he indicated that uh - General Brown was not qualified to be a sewer commissioner.
I don't think that's a proper way to describe aayuh- chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who has fought for his country for thirty-five years, and I'm sure the governor would agree with me on that.
Uh - I think Senator Dole would show more good judgment and discretion than to so describe uh - a heroic and brave and very outstanding leader of the military.
So I think our selection uh - of Bob Dole as vice president uh - is based on merit.
And if he should ever become uh - the president of the United States, with his vast experience as member the House and a member of the Senate, as well as a vice president, I think he would do an outstanding job as president of the United States.
 That's a tribute to their interest in this election.
 Well, first, uh - let me set the record straight.
I vetoed the strip-mining bill, Mr. Kraft, because it was the overwhelming consensus of knowledgeable people that that strip-mining bill would have meant the loss of literally uh - thousands of jobs, something around a hundred and forty thousand jabs.
Number two, that strip-mining bill would've severely set back our need for more coal, and Governor Carter has said repeatedly that coal is the resource that we need to use more in the effort to become independent of the uh - Arab oil supply.
So, I vetoed it because of a loss of jobs and because it would've interfered with our energy independence program.
The auto emissions - uh - it was agreed by Leonard Woodcock, the head of the UAW, and by the uh - heads of all of the automobile industry, we had labor and management together saying that those auto emission standards had to be modified.
But let's talk about what the Ford administration has done in the field of environment.
I have increased, as president, by over 60 percent the funding for water treatment plants in the United States, the federal contribution.
I have fully funded the land and water conservation program; in fact, have recommended and the Congress approved a substantially increased land and water conservation program.
Uh - I have uh - added in the current year budget the funds for the National Park Service.
For example, we uh - proposed about $12 million to add between four and five hundred more employees for the National Park Service.
And a month or so ago I did uh - likewise say over the next ten years we should expand - double - this national parks, the wild wilderness areas, the scenic river areas.
And then, of course, the - the final thing is that I have signed and approved of more scenic rivers, more wilderness areas, since I've been president than any other president in the history of the United States.
 Well, I might say that I think the League of Conservation Voters is absolutely right.
This uh - administration's record on environment is very bad.
Uh - I think it's accurate to say that the uh - strip-mining law which was passed twice by the Congress - uh - and was only like two votes I believe of being overridden - would have been good for the country.
The claim that it would have put hundred and forty thousand miners out of work is uh - hard to believe, when at the time Mr. Ford vetoed it, the United Mine Workers was uh - supporting the bill.
And I don't think they would have supported the uh - bill had they known that they would lose a hundred and forty thousand jobs.
There's been a consistent policy on the part of this administration to lower or delay enforcement of air pollution standards and water pollution standards.
And under both President Nixon and Ford, monies have been impounded that would've gone to uh - cities and others to control uh - water pollution.
We have no energy policy.
We, I think, are the only developed nation in the world that has no comprehensive energy policy, to permit us to plan in an orderly way how to shift from increasing the scarce uh - energy uh - forms: oil, and have research and development concentrated on the increased use of coal, which I strongly favor.
The research and development to be used primary to make the coal burning uh - be clean.
We need a heritage trust program, similar to the one we had in Georgia, to set aside additional lands that have uh - geological and archeological importance, uh natural areas for enjoyment.
Uh - the lands that Mr. Ford uh - brags about having approved are in Alaska and they are enormous in uh - in size.
But as far as the accessibility of them by the American people, it's very uh - far in the future.
We've taken no strong position in the uh - control of pollution of our oceans, and I would say the worst uh - threat to the environment of all is nuclear proliferation.
And this administration, having been in office now for two years or more, has still not taken strong and bold action to stop the proliferation of nuclear waste around the world, particularly plutonium.
Those are some brief remarks about the failures of this administration.
I would do the opposite in every respect.
 Yes, I'd be glad to.
In the first place, uh - as is the case with the environmental policy and the energy policy that I just described, and the policy for nonproliferation of uh - of nuclear waste, this administration has no urban policy.
It's impossible for mayors or governors to cooperate with the resident, because they can't anticipate what's gonna happen next.
A mayor of a city like New York, for instance, needs to know uh - eighteen months or two years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing - in things like housing, uh - pollution control, uh - crime control, education, welfare and health.
This has not been done, unfortunately.
I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford to New York: Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the federal government.
Quite often Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with uh - the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and education programs and so forth.
Uh - those uh programs were designed to help those who need it most.
And quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers.
Because of the uh - great -ly- greatly uh - advantaged uh - tho- per - persons who live in the suburbs, better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are, quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
Also I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments, and also to remove prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money so that it can be used to improve education, and health care.
We have now uh - for instance only 7 percent of the total education cost being financed by the federal government.
When uh - the Nixon-Ford Administration started, this was 10 percent.
That's a 30 percent reduction in the portion that the federal government contributes to education in just eight years.
And as you know, the education cost has gone up uh - tremendously.
The last point is that the major - uh thrust has gotta be to put people back to work.
We've got an extraordinarily high unemployment rate among downtown urban ghetto areas, uh - particularly among the very poor and particularly among minority groups, sometimes 50 or 60 percent.
And the concentration of employment opportunities in those areas would help greatly not only to reestablish the tax base, but also to help reduce the extraordinary welfare cost.
One of the major responsibilities on the shoulders of uh - New York City is to - is to finance welfare.
And I favor a shifting of the welfare cost away from the local governments altogether.
And over a longer period of time, let the federal government begin to absorb part of it that's now paid by the state governments.
Those things would help a great deal with the cities, but we still have a - a very serious problem there.
 Let me uh - speak out very strongly.
The Ford administration does have a very comprehensive program to help uh - our major metropolitan areas.
I fought for, and the Congress finally went along with a general revenue sharing program, whereby cities and uh - states, uh - the cities two-thirds and the states one-third, get over six billion dollars a year in cash through which they can uh - provide many, many services, whatever they really want.
In addition we uh - in the federal government make available to uh - cities about uh - three billion three hundred million dollars in what we call community development.
In adesh- in addition, uh - uh - as a result of my pressure an the Congress, we got a major mass transit program uh - over a four-year period, eleven billion eight-hundred million dollars.
We have a good housing program, uh - that uh - will result in cutting uh - the down payments by 50 percent and uh - having mortgage payments uh lower at the beginning of any mortgage period.
We're expanding our homestead uh - housing program.
The net result is uh - we think under Carla Hills, who's the chairman of my uh - urban development and uh - neighborhood revitalization program, we will really do a first-class job in helping uh - the communities throughout the country.
As a matter of fact, that committee under Secretary Hills released about a seventy-five-page report with specific recommendations so we can do a better job uh - the weeks ahead.
And in addition, the tax program of the Ford administration, which provides an incentive for industry to move into our major uh - metropolitan areas, into the inner cities, will bring jobs where people are, and help to revitalize those cities as they can be.
 Let me say at the outset, uh - I'm very proud of the record of this administration.
In the cabinet I have one of the outstanding, I think, administrators as the secretary of transportation, Bill Coleman.
You're familiar, I'm sure, with the recognition given in the Air Force to uh - General James, and there was just uh - approved a three-star admiral, the first in the history of the United States Navy, so uh - we are giving full recognition to individuals of quality in the Ford administration in positions of great responsibility.
In addition, uh - the Department of Justice is fully enforcing, and enforcing effectively, the Voting Rights Act, the legislation that involves jobs, housing for minorities, not only blacks but all others.
Uh - the Department of uh - uh - HUD is enforcing the new legislation that uhh - outlaws, that takes care of redlining.
Uh - what we're doing is saying that there are opportunities, business opportunities, educational opportunities, responsibilities uh - where people with talent, black or any other minority, can fully qualify.
The Office of Minority Business in the Department of Commerce has made available more money in trying to help uh - black businessmen or other minority businessmen than any other administration since the office was established.
The Office of Small Business, under Mr. Kobelinski, has a very massive program trying to help the black community.
The individual who wants to start a business or expand his business as a black businessman is able to borrow, either directly or with guaranteed loans.
I believe on the record that this administration has been more responsive and we have carried out the law to the letter, and I'm proud of the record.
 The uh - description just made of this administration's record is hard to uh - recognize.
I think it's accurate to say that Mr. Ford voted against the uh - Voting Rights Acts and the uh - Civil Rights Acts in their uh - debative stage I think once it was assured they were going to pass he finally voted for it.
This country uh - changed drastically in 1969 when the uh - terms of John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson were over and Richard Nixon and - and Gerald Ford became the presidents.
There was a time when there was hope for those who uh - were poor and downtrodden and who were - uh elderly or who were - uh ill or who were in minority groups, but that time has been gone.
I think the greatest thing that ever happened to the South was the passage of the Civil Rights Act and the opening up of opportunities - uh to black people - the chance to vote, to hold a job, to buy a house, to go to school, and to participate in public affairs.
It not only liberated - uh black people but it also liberated the whites.
We've seen uh - in many instances in recent years a minority affairs uh - section of uh Small Loan Administration, uh - Small Business Administration lend uh - a black entrepreneur just enough money to get started, and then to go bankrupt.
The bankruptcies have gone up - uh in an extraordinary degree.
Uh - FHA, which used to be a very responsible agency, uh - that everyone looked to to help own a home, lost six million dollars last year.
There've been over thirteen hundred indictments in HUD, over eight hundred convictions relating just to home loans.
And now the federal government has become the world's greatest slum landlord.
We've got a 30 percent or 40 percent unemployment rate among minority uh - young people.
And there's been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language.
And that's where there's been a great uh generation of despair, and ill health, and the lack of education, lack of purposefulness, and the lack of hope for the future.
But it doesn't take just a quiet uh - dormant uh minimum enforcement of the law.
It requires an aggressive searching out and reaching out to help people who especially need it.
And that's been lacking in the last eight years.
 I would not work hard to support any of those.
Uh - we've always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed, but the passage of them has been uh - fairly slow, and uh - few and far between.
In the two-hundred-year history there's been a very uh - cautious approach to this.
We - quite often we have a transient problem.
I - I'm strongly against a- abortion.
I think abortion's wrong.
I don't think the government oughta do anything to encourage abortion.
But I don't favor a constitutional amendment on the subject.
But short of the constitutional amendment, and within the confines of the Supreme Court rulings, I'll do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures.
I personally don't believe that the federal government oughta finance abortions, but I - I draw the line and don't support a constitutional amendment.
However, I honor the right of people who seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on uh - prayer in the schools and an abortion.
But among those you named, I won't actively work for the passage of any of them.
 Uh - Mr. Maynard, uh - the record of gun control, whether it's one city or another or in some states, does not show that the registration of a gun, handgun, or the registration of the gun owner, has in any way whatsoever decreased the crime rate or the use of that gun in the committing of a crime.
The record just doesn't prove that such legislation or action by a local city council is effective.
What we have to do, and this is the crux of the matter, is to make it very, very uh - difficult for a person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime to stay out of jail.
If we make the use of a gun in the commission.
of a crime a serious criminal offense, and that person is prosecuted, then, in my opinion, we are going after the person who uses the gun for the wrong reason.
I don't believe in the registration of handguns or the registration of the handgun owner.
That has not proven to be effective, and therefore, I think the better way is to go after the criminal, the individual who commits a crime in the possession of a gun and uses that gun for a part of his criminal activity.
Those are the people who ought to be in jail.
And the only way to do it is to pass strong legislation so that once apprehended, indicted, convicted, they'll be in jail and off the streets and not using guns in the commission of a crime.
 Yes, I have.
And uh - the individuals that uh - with whom I've consulted have not uh - convinced me that uh - a national registration of handguns or handgun owners will solve the problem you're talking about.
The person who wants to use a gun for an illegal purpose can get it whether it's registered or outlawed.
They will be obtained.
And they are the people who ought to go behind bars.
You should not in the process penalize the legitimate handgun owner.
And when you go through the process of registration, you in effect, are penalizing that individual who uses his gun for a very legitimate purpose.
 I - I think it's accurate to say that Mr. Ford's position on gun control has changed.
Uh - earlier, uh - Mr. Levi, his uh - attorney general, put forward a gun control proposal, which Mr. Ford later, I believe, espoused, that called for the prohibition against the uh sale aw- of the uh - so-called Saturday Night Specials.
And it would've put uh - very strict uh - uh - control over who owned a handgun.
I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun.
And uh - the only purpose that I would see in registering uh - handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the uh - ownership of those guns by those who've used them in the commission of a crime, or who uh - have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun.
I believe that limited approach to the - to the question would be uh - advisable, and - and I think, adequate.
But that's as far as I would go with it.
 While I was governor of Georgia, although I'm not a lawyer, we had complete reform of the Georgia court system.
We uh - streamlined the structure of the court, put in administrative officers, put a unified court system in, required that all uh - severe sentences be reviewed far uniformity.
And, in addition to that put forward a proposal that was adopted and used throughout my own term of office of selection of - for all judges and district attorneys or prosecuting attorneys, on the basis of merit.
Every time I had a vacancy on the Georgia Supreme Court - and I filled five of those vacancies out of seven total and about half the court of appeals judges, about 35 percent of the trial judges - I was given from an objective panel the five most highly qualified persons in Georgia.
And from those five, I always chose the first one or second one.
So merit selection of judges is the most important single criterion.
And I would institute the same kind of procedure as president, not only in judicial appointments, but also in diplomatic appointments.
Secondly, I think that the Burger Court has fairly well confirmed the major and - and most far-reaching and most controversial decisions of the Warren Court.
Civil rights - uh has been confirmed by the Burger Court, hasn't been uh - reversed, and I don't think there's any inclination to reverse those basic decisions.
The one-man, one-vote rule, which is a very important one that uh - s- struck down the unwarranted influence in the legislature of parsley - uh populated areas of - of the states.
The uh - right of indigent or very poor accused persons to uh - legal counsel.
Uh - I think the Burger Court has confirmed that basic and very controversial decision of the Warren Court.
Also the - the protection of an arrested person against unwarranted persecution in trying to get a false uh - confession.
But now I think there have been a couple of instances where the Burger Court has made technical rulings where an obviously guilty person was later found to be guilty.
And I think that in that case uh - some of the more liberal uh - members of the uh - so-called Warren Court agreed with those decisions.
But the only uh - thing I uh - have pointed out was, what I've just said, and that there was a need to clarify the technicalities so that you couldn't be forced to release a person who was obviously guilty just because of a - of a small technicality in the law.
And - and that's a reversal of position uh by the Burger Court with which I do agree.
 Okay, I thought I answered it by saying that it would be on the basis of merit.
Once the uh - search and analysis procedure had been completed, and once I'm given a list of the five or seven or ten uh - best qualified persons in the country, I would make a selection from among those uh - persons.
If the uh - list was, uh - in my opinion, fairly uniform, if there was no outstanding person, then I would undoubtedly choose someone who would most accurately reflect my own basic politi- political philosophy as best I could determine it.
Which would be uh - to continue the progress that has been made under the last two uh - courts - the Warren Court and the Burger Court.
I would also like to uh - completely revise our criminal justice system - to do some of the things at the federal level in court reform that I've just described, as has been done in Georgia and other states.
And then I would like to appoint people who would be interested in helping with that.
I know that uh Chief Justice Burger is.
He hasn't had help from the administration, from the Congress, to carry this out.
The uh - emphasis, I think, of the - of the court system uh - should be to interpret the uh - the Constitution and the laws uh - equally between property protection and personal protection.
But when there's uh - a very narrow decision - which quite often there's one that reaches the Supreme Court - I think the choice should be with human rights.
And uh - that would be another factor that I would follow.
 Well, I think the answer uh - as to the kind of person that I would select uh - is obvious.
I had one opportunity to nominate uh - an individual to the Supreme Court and I selected the Circuit Court of Appeals judge from Illinois, uh - John Paul Stevens.
I selected him because of his outstanding record as a Circuit Court of Appeals Judge, and I was very pleased that uh - an overwhelming Democratic United States Senate, after going into his background, came to the conclusion that he was uh - fit and should serve, and the vote in his behalf was overwhelming.
So, I would say somebody in the format of uh - Justice Stevens would be the kind of an individual that I would uh - select in the future, as I did him in the past.
I uh - believe, however, a comment ought to be made about the direction of the uh - Burger Court, vis-a-vis the uh - court uh - that preceded it.
It seems to me that the Miranda case was a case that really made it very, very difficult for the - uh police, the law enforcement people in this country to uh - do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes uh - were properly handled and uh - sent to jail.
The Miranda case, uh - the Burger Court uh - is gradually changing, and I'm pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the uh - Burger Court to modify the so-called Miranda decision.
Uh - I might make a correction uh - of what uh - Governor Carter said, uh speaking of uh - uh - gun control, uh - yes, it is true, I believe that the sale of uh - Saturday Night S- Specials should be cut out, but he wants the registration of handguns.
 Well, Mr. Kraft, uh - I violently disagree with your assessment.
And I don't think the record justifies the conclusion that you come to.
Uh - let me uh - talk about uh - the economic announcements that were made just this past week.
Yes, it was announced that the uh - GNP real growth in the third quarter was at 4 percent.
But do you realize that over the last ten years that's a higher figure than the average growth during that ten-year period?
Now it's lower than the nine-point-point-two percent growth in the first quarter, and it's lower than the uh 5 percent growth in the second quarter.
But every economist - liberal, conservative that I'm familiar with - recognizes that in the fourth quarter of this year and in the fifth quar- uh - the first quarter of next year that we'll have an increase in real GNP.
But now let's talk about the pluses that came out this week.
We had an 18 percent increase in housing starts.
We had a substantial increase in new permits for housing.
As a matter of fact, based on the announcement this week, there will be at an annual rate of a million, eight hundred and some thousand new houses built, which is a tremendous increase over last year and a substantial increase over the earlier part of this year.
Now in addition, we had a very - some very good news in the reduction in the rate of inflation.
And inflation hits everybody: those who are working and those who are on welfare.
The rate of inflation, as announced just the other day, is under 5 percent; and the uh - 4.4 percent that was indicated at the time of the 4 percent GNP was less than the 5.4 percent.
It means that the American buyer is getting a better bargain today because inflation is less.
 With all due respect to President Ford, I think he ought to be ashamed of mentioning that statement, because we have the highest unemployment rate now than we had at any time between the Great Depression caused by Herbert Hoover and the time President Ford took office.
We've got seven and a half million people out of jobs.
Since he's been in office, two and a half million more American people have lost their jobs.
In the last four months alone, five hundred thousand Americans have gone on the unemployment roll.
In the last month, we've had a net loss of one hundred and sixty-three thousand jobs.
Anybody who says that the inflation rate is in good shape now ought to talk to the housewives.
One of the overwhelming results that I've seen in the polls is that people feel that you can't plan anymore.
There's no way to make a prediction that my family might be able to own a home or to put my kid through college.
Savings accounts are losing money instead of gaining money.
Inflation is robbing us.
Under the present administration - Nixon's and Ford's - we've had three times the inflation rate that we experienced under President Johnson and President Kennedy.
The economic growth is less than half today what it was at the beginning of this year.
And housing starts - he compares the housing starts with last year.
I don't blame him, because in 1975 we had fewer housing starts in this country, fewer homes built, than any year since 1940.
That's thirty-five years.
And we've got a 35 percent unemployment rate in many areas of this country among construction workers.
And Mr. Ford hasn't done anything about it.
And I think this shows a callous indifference to the families that have suffered so much.
He has vetoed bills passed by Congress within the congressional budget guidelines job opportunities for two million Americans.
We'll never have a balanced budget, we'll never meet the needs of our people, we'll never control the inflationary spiral, as long as we have seven and a half or eight million people out of work, who are looking for jobs.
And we've probably got two and a half more million people who are not looking for jobs any more, because they've given up hope.
That is a very serious indictment of this administration.
It's probably the worst one of all.
 Well, that's not exactly an accurate description of what happened.
When I was that far ahead, it was immediately following the Democratic Convention, and before the Republican Convention.
At that time, uh - 25 or 30 percent of the Reagan supporters said that they would not support President Ford.
But as occurred at the end of the con- Democratic Convention, the Republican Party unified itself.
And I think immediately following the Republican Convention, there was about a ten-point spread.
I believe that to be accurate, I had 49 percent; President Ford, 39 percent.
Uh - the polls uh - are good indications of fluctuations, but they vary widely one from another.
And the only poll I've ever followed is the one that uh - you know, is taken on election day.
I was in uh - thirty primaries in the spring, and uh - at first it was obvious that I didn't have any standing in the poll.
As a matter of fact, I think when Gallup ran their first poll in December of 1975 they didn't put my name on the list.
They had thirty-five people on the list.
My name wasn't even there.
And at the beginning of the year I had about 2 percent.
So the polls to me are interesting, but they don't determine, you know, my hopes or - or my despair.
I campaign among people.
I've never depended on powerful political figures to put me in office.
I have a direct relationship with hundreds of people around - hundreds of thousands around the country who actively campaign for me.
In Georgia alone, for instance, I got 84 percent of the vote, and I think there were fourteen people uh - in addition to myself on the ballot, and Governor Wallace had been very strong in Georgia.
That's an overwhelming support from my own people who know me best.
And today, we have about five hundred Georgians at their own expense - just working people who believe in me - spread around the country uh - involved in the political campaign.
So, the polls are interesting, but uh - I don't know how to explain the fluctuation.
I think a lot of it uh - depends on current events - uh - sometimes foreign affairs, sometimes domestic affairs.
But I think our hold uh - of support among those who uh - are crucial to the election has been fairly steady.
And my success in the primary season was, I think, notable for a newcomer, from someone who's from outside Washington, who - who never has been a part of the Washington establishment.
And I think that we'll have good results uh - on November the second for myself and I hope for the country.
 I think uh - the uh - increase and the uh - prospects as far as I'm concerned and the I - less favorable prospects for Governor Carter, reflect that Governor Carter uh - is inconsistent in many of the positions that he takes.
He tends to distort on a number of occasions.
Uh - just a moment ago, for example, uh - he uh - was indicating that uh - uh - in the 1950s, for example, uh - unemployment was very low.
He fails to point out that uh - in the 1950s we were engaged in the war in Vietnam.
We - I mean in Korea - we had uh - three million five hundred thousand young men uh - in the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines.
That's not the way to end unemployment or to reduce unemployment.
At the present time we're at peace.
We have reduced the number of people in the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines from three million, one hundred - three million, five hundred thousand to two mil- lion one hundred thousand.
We are not at war.
We have reduced the military manpower by a million four hundred thousand.
If we had that many more people in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and Marines, our unemployment figure would be considerably less.
But this administration doesn't believe the way to reduce unemployment is to go to war, or to increase the number of people in the military.
So you cannot compare unemployment, as you sought to, uh - with the present time with the 1950s, because the then administration had people in the military - they were at war, they were fighting overseas, and this administration has reduced the size of the military by a million four hundred thousand.
They're in the civilian labor market and they're not fighting anywhere around the world today.
 For twenty-five years I served in the Congress under five presidents.
I saw them work, I saw them make very hard decisions.
I didn't always agree with their decisions, whether they were Democratic or Republican presidents.
For the last two years, I've been the president, and I have found from experience that it's much more difficult to make those decisions than it is to second-guess them.
I became president at the time that the United States was in a very troubled time.
We had inflation of over 12 percent, we were on the brink of the worst recession in the last forty years, we were still deeply involved in the problems of Vietnam.
The American people had lost faith and trust and confidence in the presidency itself.
That uh - situation called for me to first put the United States on a steady course and to keep our keel well balanced, because we had to face the difficult problems that had all of a sudden hit America.
I think most people know that I did not seek the presidency.
But I am asking for your help and assistance to be president for the next four years.
During this campaign we've seen a lot of television shows, a lot of bumper stickers, and a great many uh - slogans of one kind or another.
But those are not the things that count.
What counts is, that the United States celebrated its 200th birthday on July fourth.
As a result of that wonderful experience all over the United States, there is a new spirit in America.
The American people are healed, are working together.
The American people are moving again, and moving in the right direction.
We have cut inflation by better than half.
We have came out of the recession and we're well on the road to real prosperity in this country again.
There has been a restoration of faith and confidence and trust in the presidency because I've been open, candid and forthright.
I have never promised more than I could produce and I have produced everything that I promised.
We are at peace.
Not a single young American is fighting or dying on any foreign soil tonight.
We have peace with freedom.
I've been proud to be president of the United States during these very troubled times.
I love America just as all of you love America.
It would be the highest honor for me to have your support on November second and for you to say, "Jerry Ford, you've done a good job, keep on doing it."
Thank you, and good night.
 Thank you Barbara (barely audible).
The major purpose of an election for president is to choose a leader.
Someone who can analyze the depths of feeling in our country to set a standard for our people to follow, to inspire our people to reach for greatness, to correct our defects, to answer difficult questions, to bind ourselves together in a spirit of unity.
I don't believe the present administration has done that.
We have been discouraged and we've been alienated.
Sometimes we've been embarrassed and sometimes we've been ashamed.
Our people are out of work, and there's a sense of withdrawal.
But our country is innately very strong.
Mr. Ford is a good and decent man, but he's in - been in office now more than eight hundred days approaching almost as long as John Kennedy was in office.
I'd like to ask the American people what, what's been accomplished.
A lot remains to be done.
My own background is different from his.
I was a school board member, and a library board member.
I served an a hospital authority.
And I was in the state senate and I was governor and I'm an engineer, a Naval officer, a farmer, a businessman.
And I believe we require someone who can work harmoniously with the Congress, who can work closely with the people of this country, and who can bring a new image and a new spirit to Washington.
Our tax structure is a disgrace, it needs to be reformed.
I was Governor of Georgia for four years.
We never increased sales taxes or income tax or property tax.
As a matter of fact, the year before I went out of office we gave a $50 million refund to the property taxpayers of Georgia.
We spend six hundred dollars per person in this country - every man, woman and child - for health care.
We still rank fifteenth among all the nations of the world in infant mortality.
And our cancer rate is uh - higher than any country in the world.
We don't have good health care.
We could have it.
Employment ought to be restored to our people.
We've become almost a welfare state.
We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did eight years ago when the Republicans took over the White House.
Our people wanna go back to work.
Our education system can be improved.
Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained.
Our housing programs have uh - gone bad.
It used to be that the average - uh family could own a house.
But now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes.
The budget was more grossly out of balance last year than ever before in the history of our country - $65 billion - primarily because our people are not at work.
Inflation is robbing us, as we've already discussed, and the government bureaucracy is uh - just a horrible mess.
This doesn't have to be.
Now I don't know all the answers.
Nobody could.
But I do know that if the president of the United States and the Congress of the United States and the people of the United States said, "I believe our nation is greater than what we are now."
I believe that if we are inspired, if we can achieve a degree of unity, if we can set our goals high enough and work toward recognized goals with industry and labor and agriculture along with government at all levels, then we can achieve great things.
We might have to do it slowly.
There are no magic answers to do it.
But I believe together we can make great progress.
We can correct our difficult mistakes and answer those very tough questions.
I believe in the greatness of our country, and I believe the American people are ready for a change in Washington.
We've been drifting too long.
We've been dormant too long.
We've been discouraged too long.
And we have not set an example for our own people.
But I believe that we can now establish in the White House a good relationship with Congress, a good relationship with our people, set very high goals for our country.
And with inspiration and hard work we can achieve great things.
And let the world know - that's very important.
But more importantly, let the people in our own country realize that we still live in the greatest nation on earth.
Thank you very much.
 No.
There are many people who believe that the only way we can get this country turned around is to tax the middle class more and punish them more, but the truth is that middle-class Americans are basically the only group of Americans who've been taxed more in the 1980s and during the last 12 years, even though their incomes have gone down.
The wealthiest Americans have been taxed much less, even though their incomes have gone up.
 Do I have 1 minute?
Just the ground rules here.
 Well, he doesn't like trickle down government but I think he's talking about the Reagan-Bush years where we created 15 million jobs.
The rich are paying a bigger percent of the total tax burden.
And what I don't like is trickle down government.
And therein, I think Governor Clinton keeps talking about trickle down, trickle down, and he's still talking about spending more and taxing more.
 The basic problem with it, it doesn't balance the budget.
If you forecast it out, we still have a significant deficit under each of their plans, as I understand them.
 I disagree with both of them.
For one thing, let me just follow up here.
I disagree with Mr. Perot that the answer is to raise -- put a 50-cent gas tax on the middle class and raise more taxes on the middle class and the working poor than on the wealthy.
 I think everybody's paying too much taxes.
He refers to one tax increase.
Let me remind you it was a Democratic tax increase, and I didn't want to do it and I went along with it.
And I said I make a mistake.
If I make a mistake, I admit it.
That's quite different than some.
But I think that's the American way.
 Well, the record in Arkansas.
I mean, look at it, and that's what we're asking America to have?
Now look, he says Arkansas's a poor state.
They are.
But in almost every category they're lagging.
I'll give you an example.
He talks about all the jobs he's created in one or 2 years.
Over the last ten years since he's been governor, they're 30% behind, 30% -- they're 30% of the national average.
On pay for teachers, on all these categories, Arkansas is right near the very bottom.
 Mr. Bush's Bureau of Labor Statistics says that Arkansas ranks first in the country in the growth of new jobs this year, first.
 This year.
 4th in manufacturing jobs, 4th in the reduction of poverty, 4th in income increase.
Over the last 10 years we've created manufacturing jobs much more rapidly than the national average.
Over the last 5 years our income has grown more rapidly than the national average.
We are 2nd in tax burden, the 2nd lowest tax burden in the country.
 I grew up 5 blocks from Arkansas.
Let's put it in perspective.
It's a beautiful state.
It's a fairly rural state.
It has a population less than Chicago or Los Angeles, about the size of Dallas and Forth Worth combined.
 It's irrelevant.
 No, no, no, but I could say, you know, that I ran a small grocery store on the corner, therefore I extrapolate that into the fact that I can run Wal-Mart.
That's not true.
 Mr. Perot, with all respect, I think it is highly relevant, and I think that a 4-billion dollar budget of state and federal funds is not all that small, and I think the fact that I took a state that was one of the poorest states in the country and had been for 153 years and tried my best to modernize its economy and to make the kind of changes that have generated support from people like the presidents of Apple Computer and Hewlett-Packard and some of the biggest companies in this country, 24 retired generals and admirals and hundreds of business executives, are highly relevant.
And, you know, I'm frankly amazed that since you grew up 5 blocks from there you would think that what goes on in that state is irrelevant.
I think it's been pretty impressive.
 It's not --
 And the people who have jobs --
 I don't have a dog in this fight, but I'd like to get in on this.
 Well, you think it's relevant.
 Governor Clinton has to operate under a balanced budget amendment -- he has to do it, that is the law.
I'd like to see a balanced budget amendment for America, to protect the American taxpayers, and then that would discipline not only the executive branch but the spending Congress, the Congress that's been in control of one party, his party, for 38 years.
And we almost had it done.
 Jim, I don't think that's a fair shot.
I hear it -- I hear it echoed by political opponents.
But I don't think it's fair.
I think we've been fighting from day one to do something about the inner cities.
I'm for enterprise zones.
I have had it in every single proposal I've sent to the Congress.
And now we hear a lot of talk, oh, well, we all want enterprise zones, and yet the House and the Senate can't send it down without loading it up with a lot of, you know, these Christmas tree ornaments they put on the legislation.
 I don't think that's true at all.
I don't think that's true, but you know, let others fire away on it.
 I'd like to just talk about issues, and so --
 Well, no, but the point is that's a subjective thing.
See, the subjective thing is when does President Bush react?
And it would be very difficult for me to answer that in any short period of time.
 I thought you'd forgotten I was here.
 I will let the American people decide that.
I would rather not critique the 2 candidates.
 The only thing I would say about that is, I think that on the economy, Mr. Bush said for a long time there was no recession, and then said it would be better to do nothing than to have a compromise effort with the Congress.
 Well, I think you're overlooking that we have had major accomplishments in the first term.
But if you're talking about protecting the taxpayer against his friends in the US Congress, go back to what it was like when you had a Democratic president and a Democratic Congress.
You don't have to go back to Herbert Hoover.
Go back to Jimmy Carter, and interest rates were 21%, inflation was 15%.
The misery index -- unemployment and inflation added together -- it was invented by the Democrats -- went right through the roof.
We've cut it in half.
 I think the General Motors thing is very relevant.
I did everything I could to get General Motors to face its problems in the mid-'80s while it was still financially strong.
They just wouldn't do it, and everybody now knows the terrible price they're paying by waiting until it's obvious to the brain-dead that they have problems.
 I don't have any criticism of Mr. Perot.
I think what I'd like to talk about a minute, since you're asking the question, is the General Motors issue.
I don't think there's any question that the automobile executives made some errors in the 1980s, but I also think we should look at how much productivity has increased lately, how much labor has done to increase productivity and how much management has done.
And we're still losing a lot of auto jobs, in my judgment, because we don't have a national economic strategy that will build the industrial base of this country.
 To this?
 Well, I wondered, when Governor Clinton was talking to the auto workers, whether he talked about his and Senator Gore's favoring CAFE standards, fuel efficiency standards, of 40 miles per gallon.
That would break the auto industry and throw a lot of people out of work.
 Let's just talk about the CAFE standards -- that's the fuel efficiency standards.
They are now 27.5 miles per gallon per automobile fleet.
I never said -- and I defy you to find where I said -- I gave an extensive environmental speech in April, and I said that we ought to have a goal of raising the fuel efficiency standards to 40 miles a gallon.
I think that should be a goal.
I have never said we should write it into law if there is evidence that that goal cannot be achieved.
The Natl Science Foundation did a study which said it would be difficult for us to reach fuel efficiency standards in excess of 37 miles per gallon by the year 2000.
 Well, everybody's nibbling around the edges.
Let's go to the center of the bull's-eye, the core problem.
And believe me, everybody on the factory floor all over this country knows it.
You implement that NAFTA, the Mexican trade agreement, where they pay people a dollar an hour, have no health care, no retirement, no pollution controls, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, and you're going to hear a giant sucking sound of jobs being pulled out of this country right at a time when we need the tax base to pay the debt and pay down the interest on the debt and get our house back in order.
 Oh, no, it will cost jobs, but that's not -- let me say this.
I'd rather, if you gave me 2 bad choices --
 I'd rather have some jobs left here than just see everything head south, see?
 No, I'm saying our principal need now is to stabilize the tax base, which is the job base, and create a growing, dynamic base.
Now please, folks, if you don't hear anything else I say, remember where the -- millions of people at work are our tax base.
 I'm caught in the middle on NAFTA.
Ross says, with great conviction, he opposes the North American Free Trade Agreement.
I am for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
My problem with Governor Clinton, once again, is that one time he's gonna make up his mind, he sees some merit in it, but then he sees a lot of things wrong with it.
Then the other day he says he's for it, however then we've got to pass other legislation.
 I'd like to respond to that.
You know, Mr. Bush was very grateful when I was among the Democrats who said he ought to have the authority to negotiate an agreement with Mexico.
Neither I nor anybody else, as far a I know, agreed to give him our proxy to say that whatever he did was fine for the workers of this country and for the interests of this country.
 I think he made my case.
On the one hand, it's a good deal but on the other hand I'd make it better.
You can't do that as president.
You can't do it on the war, where he says well, I was with the minority but I guess I would have voted with the majority.
 That's what's wrong with Mr. Bush.
His whole deal is you've gotta be for it or against it, you can't make it better.
I believe we can be better.
I think the American people are sick and tired of either/or solutions, people being pushed in the corner, polarized to extremes.
 But I've always said trickle-down government is bad.
 I could run this string out a long time, but remember this, Jim.
Those 209 Americans last Thursday night in Richmond told us they wanted us to stop talking about each other and start talking about Americans and their problems and their promise, and I think we ought to get back to that.
 Is there an equal time rule tonight?
 Yes.
 Or do you just keep lunging in at will?
I thought we were going to have equal time, but maybe I just have to interrupt the other 2.
Is that the way it works?
 Now that we've talked all around the problem about free trade, let's go again to the center of the bull's- eye.
 I do, I do.
 I just want to make -- foreign lobbyists, this whole thing.
Our country has sold out to foreign lobbyists.
We don't have free trade.
Both parties have foreign lobbyists on leaves in key roles in their campaigns.
And if there's anything more unwise than that, I don't know what it is.
Every debate I bring this up, and nobody ever addresses it.
 Most people that are lobbying are lobbying the Congress.
And I don't think there's anything wrong with an honest person who happens to represent an interest of another country for making his case.
That's the American way.
And what you're assuming is that that makes the recipient of the lobbying corrupt or the lobbyist himself corrupt.
I don't agree with that.
 And as soon as I found it out, he went out the door.
 Well --
 One quick relevant specific.
We're getting ready to dismantle the airlines industry in our country, and none of you know it.
And I doubt in all candor if the president knows it.
But this deal that we're doing with BAC and US Air and KLM and Northwest, guess who's on the president's campaign big time: a guy from Northwest.
This deal is terribly destructive to the US airline industry.
One of the largest industries in the world is the travel and tourist business.
We won't be making airplanes in this country 10 years from now if we let deals like this go through.
 Jim.
 Why, I had a great response to that.
 Just very briefly.
I think Ross is right and that we do need some more restrictions on lobbyists.
We ought to make them disclose the people they've given money to when they're testifying before congressional committees; we ought to close the lawyers' loopholes; they ought to have to disclose when they're really lobbying.
And we ought to have to limit -- we ought to have a much longer period of time, about 5 years, between the time when people can leave executive branch offices and then go out and start lobbying for foreign interests.
I agree with that.
 I promise it's less than 10 seconds.
 I heard Gov Clinton congratulate us on 1 thing -- first time he said something pleasant about this administration.
Productivity in this country is up, it is way up -- productivity is up.
And that's a good thing.
There are many good ones, but I was glad he acknowledged that.
Thank you.
 Now give me 1 second...
 I've volunteered.
Now, look, I'm just kind of a, you know, cur dog here; I was put on the ballot by the people, not special interests.
So I have to stand up for myself.
Now, Jim, let me get it out.
On the 2nd debate, I offered, since both sides want the enterprise zones and we can't get together, I said I'll take a few days off and go to Washington and hold hands with you and we'll get it done.
I'll take a few days off and hold hands with you and get this airlines thing straightened, because that's important to this country.
That's kind of pathetic I have to do it -- and nobody's called me yet to come up, I might mention.
 But if they do -- if they do, it's easy to fix.
If you all want the enterprise zones, why don't we pass the dang thing and do it, right?
 Uh-uh.
Uh-uh.
 If I had it to do over again I might answer the questions a little better.
You know, I'd been in public life a long time and no one had ever questioned my role and so I was asked a lot of questions about things that happened a long time ago and I don't think I answered them as well as I could have.
 Well, I've expressed my heartfelt difference with Governor Clinton on organizing demonstrations while in a foreign land against your country, when young ghetto kids have been drafted and are dying.
 Yes, sir.
Helen?
 I've spent my whole adult life very close to the military.
I feel very strongly about the people who go into battle for our country.
I appreciate their idealism, their sacrifices.
Appreciate the sacrifices their families make.
That's been displayed again and again in a very tangible way.
 I wouldn't have taken any of the alternatives.
I believe that -- I believe I made a mistake.
I did it for the very reasons you say.
There was one good thing that came out of that budget agreement, and that is we put a cap on discretionary spending.
One-third of the president's budget is at the president's discretion, or really the Congress, since they appropriate every dime and tell a president how to spend every dime.
We've put a cap on the growth of all that spending, and that's good and that's helped.
 101 in leadership is be accountable for what you do.
Let's go back to the tax and budget summit briefly.
Nobody ever told the American people that we increased spending $1.83 for every dollar of taxes raised.
That's absolutely unconscionable.
Both parties carry a huge blame for that on their shoulders.
 I'm watching the lights.
 The mistake that was made was making the "read my lips" promise in the first place just to get elected, knowing what the size of the deficit was.
 You're talking about 2 different subjects.
In order to lead, you first have to use the White House as a bully pulpit and lead; then you have to develop consensus or you can't get anything done, and that's where we are now.
We can't get anything done.
 Well, I believe in the town hall meetings; they started with my campaign in New Hampshire.
And I think Ross Perot has done a good job in having them.
And I, as you know, pushed for the debate to include the 209 American citizens who were part of it in Richmond a few days ago.
I've done a lot of them, and I'll continue to do them as president.
 I would like the record to show the panelists that Ross Perot took the first shot at the press.
My favorite bumper sticker, though, is: Annoy the Media.
Re-elect President Bush.
And I just had to work that in.
Sorry, Helen.
 You don't see Margaret Tutwiler sitting in there with me today.
 Huh?
 I happen to think she's a key person.
I think our Cabinet members are key people.
I think the woman that works with me, Rose Zamaria, is about as tough as a boot out there and makes some discipline and protects the taxpayer.
 Well, I come from the computer business, and everybody knows the women are more talented than the men.
So we have a long history of having a lot of talented women.
One of our first officers was a woman, the chief financial officer.
She was a director.
And it was so far back, it was considered so odd, and even though we were a tiny, little company at the time, it made all the national magazines.
 I've got reply on that.
That gets to the national honor.
We did not say to Saddam Hussein, Ross, you can take the northern part of Kuwait.
 Well, where are the papers?
 That is absolutely absurd.
 Where are the papers?
 Glaspie has testified --
 If you have time, go through Nexis and Lexis, pull all the old news articles, look at what Ambassador Glaspie said all through the fall and what-have-you, and then look at what she and Kelly and all the others in State said at the end when they were trying to clean it up.
And talk to any head of any of those key committees in the Senate.
They will not let them see the written instructions given to Ambassador Glaspie.
And I suggest that in a free society owned by the people, the American people ought to know what we told Ambassador Glaspie to tell Saddam Hussein, because we spent a lot of money and risked lives and lost lives in that effort, and did not accomplish most of our objectives.
 For which I apologize.
When I make a mistake I say I'm sorry.
 No, I don't.
I apologize for it but that one got right to the national honor and I'm sorry.
I just couldn't let it stand.
 Susan, I don't agree that there are no women and minorities in important positions in my campaign.
There are many.
But I think even more relevant is my record at home.
For most of my time as governor a woman was my chief of staff.
An African American was my chief cabinet officer.
An African American was my chief economic development officer.
 No.
They're not correct and if you look at my life, until I got involved in this effort, I was one person.
And then after the Republican dirty tricks group got through with me I'm another person, which I consider an absolutely sick operation.
And all of you in the press know exactly what I'm talking about.
 Let's take Mr. Bush for the moment at his word -- he's right, we don't have any evidence at least that our government did tell Saddam Hussein he could have that part of Kuwait.
And let's give him the credit he deserves for organizing Operation Desert Storm and Desert Shield.
It was a remarkable event.
 Well, it's awful easy when you're dealing with 90-90 hindsight.
We did try to bring Saddam Hussein into the family of nations; he did have the 4th largest army.
All our Arab allies out there thought we ought to do just exactly that.
And when he crossed the line, I stood up and looked into the camera and I said: This aggression will not stand.
And we formed a historic coalition, and we brought him down, and we destroyed the 4th largest army.
And the battlefield was searched, and there wasn't one single iota of evidence that any US weapons were on that battlefield.
And the nuclear capability has been searched by the United Nations, and there hasn't been one single scintilla of evidence that there's any US technology involved in it.
 Gene, there is a problem in the sense that there are some problem banks, and on December 19th new regulations will go into effect which will in effect give the government the responsibility to close some banks that are not technically insolvent but that are plainly in trouble.
 Well, I don't believe it would be appropriate for a president to suggest that the banking system is not sound.
It is sound.
There are some problem banks out there.
But what we need is financial reform; we need some real financial reform, banking reform legislation.
And I have proposed that.
And when I am re-elected, I believe one of the first things ought to be to press a new Congress not beholden to the old ways to pass financial reform legislation that modernizes the banking system, doesn't put a lot of inhibitions on it, and protects the depositors through keeping the FDIC sound.
 Well, nobody's gotten into the real issue yet on the savings and loan again -- nobody's got a business background, I guess.
The whole problem came up in 1984.
The president of the US was told officially it was a $20-billion problem.
These crooks -- now, Willie Sutton would have gone to own a savings and loan rather than rob banks, because he robbed banks because that's where the money is; owning a savings and loan is where the money was.
 The debt and the deficit.
Well, if you watched my television show the other night, you saw it.
And if you watch it Thursday, Friday, Saturday this week, you'll get more.
A shameless plug there, Mr. President.
 I would just point out, on the point Mr. Perot made, I agree that we need to cut spending in Congress.
I've called for a 25% reduction in congressional staffs and expenditures.
But the White House staff increased its expenditures by considerably more than Congress has in the last 4 years under the Bush administration, and Congress has actually spent a billion dollars less than President Bush asked them to spend.
Now, when you out-spend Congress you're really swinging.
 On government reform?
 Government reform?
 Well, how about this for a government reform policy?
Reduce the White House staff by a 3rd after or at the same time the Congress does the same thing for their staff.
Term limits for members of the US Congress.
Give the government back to the people.
Let's do it that way.
The president has term limits.
Let's limit some of these guys sitting out here tonight.
 My plan -- you can read my plan.
My plan says that we want to raise marginal incomes on family incomes above $200,000 from 31 to 36 percent, that we want to ask foreign corporations simply to pay the same percentage of taxes on their income that American corporations play (sic) in America, that we want to use that money to provide over $100 billion in tax cuts for investment in new plant and equipment, for small business, for new technologies, and for middle class tax relief.
 That's what worries me --
 Jim, you permitted Mr. Bush to break the rules, he said, to defend the honor of the country.
What about the honor of my state?
We rank first in the country in job growth, we got the lowest spending, state and local, in the country, and the 2nd lowest tax burden.
And the difference between Arkansas and the US is that we're going in the right direction and this country's going in the wrong direction.
And I have to defend the honor of my state.
 So I'm the only one that's untarnished at this point?
 I'm sure I'll do it before it's over.
 Well, I think the answer to why the drop, I think, has been the economy in the doldrums.
Why I'll win is I think I have the best plan of the 3 of us up here to do something about it.
Mine does not grow the government, it does not invest, have government invest.
 That's why I think I'll win.
 I'm the last one, right?
 One minute after you.
 I'm totally focussed on the fact that we may have bank failures and nobody answered it.
I'm totally focussed on the fact that we are still evading the issue of the Glaspie papers.
I'm totally focussed on the fact that we still could have enterprise zones, according to both parties, but we don't.
So I am still focussed on gridlock, I guess.
 I really can't believe Mr. Bush is still trying to make trust an issue after "read my lips" and 15 million new jobs and embracing what he called voodoo economics and embracing an export enhancement program for farmers he threatened to veto and going all around the country giving out money in programs that he once opposed.
 First, I'd like to thank the commission and my opponents for participating in these debates and making them possible.
I think the real winners of the debates were the American people.
 Three weeks from now -- 2 weeks from tomorrow, America goes to the polls and you're going to have to decide who you want to lead this country to economic recovery.
On jobs -- that's the number one priority, and I believe my program for stimulating investment, encouraging small business, brand-new approach to education, strengthening the American family, and, yes, creating more exports is the way to go.
I don't believe in trickle-down government, I don't believe in larger taxes and larger government spending.
 To the millions of fine decent people who did the unthinkable and took their country back in their own hands and put me on the ballot, let me pledge to you that tonight is just the beginning.
These next 2 weeks we will be going full steam ahead to make sure that you get a voice and that you get your country back.
 I'm glad you clarified that.
 Mr. Hankins, I don't feel good about it, and I think we ought to have a patient's bill of rights to take the medical decisions away from the HMOs and give them back to the doctors and nurses.
I want to come back and tell you why, but if you will forgive me, I would like to say something right now at the beginning of this debate following on the moment of silence for Mel Carnahan and Randy Carnahan and Chris Sifford.
Tipper and I were good friends with Mel and Randy, and I know that all of us here want to extend our sympathy and condolences to Jean and the family and to the Sifford family.
And I would just like to say that this debate in a way is a living tribute to Mel Carnahan because he loved the vigorous discussion of ideas in our democracy.
He was a fantastic governor of Missouri.
This state became one of the top five in the nation for health care coverage for children under his leadership.
One of the best in advancing all kinds of benefits for children to grow up healthy and strong.
And of course, this debate also takes place at a time when the tragedy of the USS Cole is on our minds and hearts and insofar as the memorial service is tomorrow, I would like to also extend sympathy to the families of those who have died and those who are still missing, and the injured.
Now, Mr. Hankins, I think that the situation that you describe has gotten completely out of hand.
Doctors are giving prescriptions, they're recommending treatments, and then their recommendations are being overruled by HMOs and insurance companies.
That is unacceptable.
I support a strong national patient's bill of rights.
It is actually a disagreement between us, a national law that is pending on this, the Dingle-Norwood bill, a bipartisan bill, is one that I support and that the governor does not.
 I, too, want to extend my prayers and blessings, God's blessings on the families whose lives were overturned yes -- tod -- last night.
It's a tragic moment.
Actually, Mr. Vice President, it's not true.
I do support a national patient's bill of rights.
As a matter of fact, I brought Republicans and Democrats together to do just that in the State of Texas to get a patient's bill of rights through.
It requires a different kind of leadership style to do it, though.
You see, in order to get something done on behalf of the people, you have to put partisanship aside, and that's what we did in my state.
We have one of the most advanced patient's bill of rights.
It says, for example, that a woman doesn't have to go through a gate keeper to go to her gynecologist.
It says that you can't gag a doctor, doctor can advise you.
The HMO, the insurance company, can't gag that doctor from giving you full advice.
And this particular bill, it allows patients to choose a doctor, their own doctor if they want to.
But we did something else that was interesting.
We're one of the first states that said you can sue an HMO for denying you proper coverage.
Now there's what's called an Independent Review Organization that you have to go through first.
It says if youve got a complaint with your insurance company, you can take your complaint to an objective body.
If the objective body rules on your behalf, the insurance company must follow those rules.
However, if the insurance company doesn't follow the findings of the IRO, then that becomes a cause of action in a court of law.
It's time for our nation to come together and do what's right for the people, and I think this is right for the people.
You know, I support a national patient's bill of rights, Mr. Vice President, and I want all people covered.
I don't want the law to supersede good law like we've got in Texas.
I think --
 Jim, we have a direct disagreement on this.
 Absolutely not.
I referred to the Dingle-Norwood bill.
It is the bipartisan bill that is now pending in the Congress.
The HMOs and the insurance companies support the other bill that's pending, the one that the Republican majority has put forward.
They like it because it doesn't accomplish what I think really needs to be accomplished to give the decisions back to the doctors and nurses and give you a right of appeal to somebody other than the HMO or insurance company, let you go to the nearest emergency room without having to call an HMO before you call 911, to let you see a specialist if you need to, and it has strong bipartisan support.
It is being blocked by the Republican leadership in the Congress.
 And I specifically would like to know whether Governor Bush will support the Dingle-Norwood bill, which is the main one pending.
 Well, the difference is is that I can get it done.
That I can get something positive done on behalf of the people.
That's what the question in this campaign is about.
It's not only what's your philosophy and what's your position on issues, but can you get things done?
And I believe I can.
 What about the Dingle-Norwood bill?
 I'm not quite through.
Let me finish.
I talked about the principles and the issues that I think are important in a patient's bill of rights.
It's kind of Washington, D.C. focus.
Well, it's in this committee or it's got this sponsor.
If I'm the president, we're going to have emergency room care, we're going have gag orders, we're going to have direct access to OB/GYN.
People will be able to take their HMO insurance company to court.
That's what I've done in Texas and that's the kind of leadership style I'll bring to Washington.
 Well, that's a great question.
I think one of the problems we have, particularly for seniors, is there is no prescription drug coverage in Medicare.
And therefore, when they have to try to purchase drugs they do so on their own, there's no kind of collective bargaining, no power of purchasing among seniors.
So I think step one to make sure prescription drugs is more affordable for seniors, and those are the folks who really rely upon prescription drugs a lot these days, is to reform the Medicare system, is to have prescription drugs as an integral part of Medicare once and for all.
The problem we have today is like the patient's bill of rights, particularly with health care, there's a lot of bickering in Washington, D.C.
It's kind of like a political issue as opposed to a people issue.
So what I want to do is I want to call upon Republicans and Democrats to forget all the arguing and finger pointing, and come together and take care of our seniors' prescription drug program, that says we'll pay for the poor seniors, we'll help all seniors with prescription drugs.
In the meantime, I think it's important to have what's called Immediate Helping Hand, which is direct money to states so that seniors, poor seniors, don't have to choose between food and medicine.
That's part of an overall overhaul.
The purchasing powers.
And I'm against price controls.
I think price controls would hurt our ability to continue important research and development.
Drug therapies are replacing a lot of medicines as we used to know it.
One of the most important things is to continue the research and development component.
And so I'm against price controls.
Expediting drugs through the FDA makes sense, of course.
Allowing the new bill that was passed in the Congress made sense to allow for, you know, drugs that were sold overseas to come back and other countries to come back into the United States.
That makes sense.
But the best thing to do is to reform Medicare.
 All right, here we go again.
Now look, if you want someone who will spend a lot of words describing a whole convoluted process and then end up supporting legislation that is supported by the big drug companies, this is your man.
If you want someone who will fight for you and who will fight for the middle-class families and working men and women, who are sick and tired of having their parents and grandparents pay higher prices for prescription drugs than anybody else, then I want to fight for you.
And you asked a great question because it's not only seniors.
Listen, for 24 years I have never been afraid to take on the big drug companies.
They do some great things.
They discover great new cures and that's great.
We want them to continue that.
But they are now spending more money on advertising and promotion.
You see all these ads?
Than they are on research and development.
And they are trying artificially extend the monopoly patent protection so they can keep charging these very high prices.
I want to streamline the approval of the competing generic drugs and the new kinds of treatments that can compete with them so we bring the price down for everybody.
Now, briefly, let me tell you how my prescription drug plan works.
The governor talked about Medicare.
I propose a real prescription drug benefit under Medicare for all seniors, all seniors, and here's how it works.
You pick your own doctor, and nobody can take that away from you.
The doctor chooses the prescription that you need and nobody can overrule your doctor.
You go to your own pharmacy and then Medicare pays half the price.
If you're poor, they pay all of it.
If you have extraordinarily high cost, then they pay all over $4,000 out-of-pocket.
And I'll bring new competition to bring the price down.
And if you pass the big drug companies' bill, nothing will happen.
 I think that we should move step-by-step toward universal health coverage, but I am not in favor of government doing it all.
We've spent 65 years now on the development of a hybrid system, partly private, partly public, and 85% of our people have health insurance, 15% don't.
That adds up to 44 million people.
That is a national outrage.
We have got to get health coverage for those who do not have it and we've got to improve the quality for those who do with a patient's bill of rights that's real and that works, the Dingle-Norwood bill, and we have got to fill in the gaps in coverage by finally bringing parity for the treatment of mental illness, because that's been left out.
We have got to deal with long-term care.
Now, here are the steps that I would take, first of all.
I will make a commitment to bring health care coverage of high quality that is affordable to every single child in America within four years.
And then we'll fill other gaps by covering the parents of those children when the family is poor or up to two and a half times the poverty rate.
I want to give a tax credit for the purchase of individual health insurance plans.
I want to give small business employers a tax credit, 25%, to encourage the providing of health insurance for the employees in small businesses.
I want to give seniors who are, well, the near elderly, I don't like that term because I am just about in that category, but those 55 to 65 ought to be able to buy into Medicare for premiums that are reasonable and fair and significantly below what they have to get now.
Now, we have a big difference on this.
And you need to know the record here.
Under Governor Bush, Texas has sunk to be 50th out of 50 in health care -- in health insurance for their citizens.
Last week he said that they were spending 3.7 billion dollars, or 4.7 billion dollars on this.
 Okay.
 I'm absolutely opposed to a national health care plan.
I don't want the federal government making decisions for consumers or for providers.
I remember what the administration tried to do in 1993.
They tried to have a national health care plan.
And fortunately, it failed.
I trust people, I don't trust the federal government.
It's going to be one of the themes you hear tonight.
I don't want the federal government making decisions on behalf of everybody.
There is an issue with the uninsured, there sure is.
And we have uninsured people in my state.
Ours is a big state, a fast-growing state.
We share a common border with another nation.
But we're providing health care for our people.
One thing about insurance, that's a Washington term.
The question is, are people getting health care, and we have a strong safety net, and there needs to be a safety net in America.
There needs to be more community health clinics where the poor can go get health care.
We need a program for the uninsured.
They've been talking about it in Washington, D.C.
The number of uninsured has now gone up for the past seven years.
We need a $2,000 credit, rebate for people, working people that don't have insurance, they can get in the marketplace and start purchasing insurance.
We need to have -- allow small businesses to write insurance across jurisdictional lines so small business can afford health care, small restaurants can afford health care.
So health care needs to be affordable and available.
We have to trust people to make decisions with their lives.
In the Medicare reform I talk about it says if you are a senior, you can stay in Medicare if you like it, and that's fine, but we're going to give you other choices to choose if you want to do so, just like they do the federal employees.
The people that work in Washington, D.C. for the U.S. Congress or the United States senate.
Get a variety of choices to make in their lives.
And that's what we ought to do for all people in America.
 Follow-up?
 Trying to find my light.
 Well, you know, it's hard to make people love one another.
I wish I knew the law because I would darn sure sign it.
I wish I knew the law that said all of us would be good parents.
One of the things the next president must do is to remind people that if we are going to have a responsible period in America, that each of us must love our children with all our heart and all our soul.
I happened to believe strong accountability encourages parental involvement, though.
I think when you measure and post results on the Internet or in the town newspapers, most parents say wait a minute, my child's school isn't doing what I want it to do and, therefore, become involved in education.
I recognize there are some who just don't seem to care.
But there are a lot of parents who feel like everything is going well in their child's school, and all of a sudden they wake up and realize that wait a minute, standards aren't being met.
That's why I'm so strong for accountability.
I believe we ought to measure a lot, three, four, five, six, seven, eighth grade.
We do so in my state of Texas.
One of the good things we've gone in Texas is we have strong accountability because you can't cure unless you know.
You can't solve a problem unless you diagnose it.
I strongly believe that one of the best things to encourage parental involvement also is to know that the classrooms will be safe and secure.
That's why I support a teacher liability act at the federal level, that says if a teacher or principal upholds reasonable standards of classroom discipline they can't be sued.
They can't be sued.
I think parents will be more involved with education when they know their children's classrooms are safe and secure as well.
I also believe that we need to say to people that if you cannot meet standards, there has to be a consequence.
Instead of just comes the soft bigotry of low expectations, that there has to be a consequence.
We can't continue to shuffle children through school.
And one of the consequences to allow parents to have different choices.
 We have huge difference between us on this question.
I'd like to start by telling you what my vision is.
I see a day in the United States of America where all of our public schools are considered excellent, world class.
Where there are no failing schools, where the classrooms are small enough in size, number of students, so that the teacher can spend enough one-on-one time with each student.
Now that means recruiting new teachers for the public schools.
It means in my plan hiring bonuses to get 100,000 new teachers in the public schools within the next four years.
It means also helping local school districts that sometimes find the parents of school age children outvoted on bond issues, to give them some help with interest-free bonding authority so that we can build new schools and modernize the classrooms.
We need to give teachers the training and professional development that they need, including a paid time off to go visit the classroom of a master teacher to pick up some new skills.
I want to give every middle-class family a $10,000 a year tax deduction for college tuition so that middle-class families will always be able to send their kids on to college.
I want to work for universal free school because we know from all the studies that the youngsters learn, kids learn more in the first few years of life than any where else.
Now, I said there was a contrast.
Governor Bush is for vouchers, and in his plan he proposes to drain more money, more taxpayer money out of the public schools for private school vouchers than all of the money that he proposes in his entire budget for public schools themselves.
And only one in 20 students would be eligible for these vouchers, and they wouldn't even pay the full tuition to private school.
I think that's a mistake.
I don't think we should give up on the private schools and leave kids trapped in failing schools.
I think we -- I think we should make it the number one priority to make our schools the best in the world, all of them.
 Yeah, I appreciate that.
I think any time we end with one of these attacks, it's appropriate to respond.
Here's what I think.
First of all, vouchers are up to states.
If you want to do a voucher program in Missouri, fine.
I strongly believe in local control of schools.
I'm a governor of state and I don't like it when the federal government tells us what to do.
I believe in local control of schools.
But here's what I said.
I've said to the extent we spend federal money on disadvantaged children, we want the schools to show us whether or not the children are learning.
What's unreasonable about that?
We expect there to be standards met and we expect there to be measurement.
And if we find success we'll praise it.
But when we find children trapped in schools that will not change and will not teach, instead of saying oh, this is okay in America just to shuffle poor kids through schools, there has to be a consequence.
And the consequence is that federal portion or federal money will go to the parent, so the parent can go to a tutoring program or another public school or another private school.
You see, there has to be a consequence.
We've got a society that says hey, the status quo is fine, just move them through.
And guess who suffers.
 Well, the program that he's proposing is not the one that he just described.
Described under your plan, Governor Bush, states would be required to pay vouchers to students to match the vouchers so that the federal government would put up.
Now, you're -- and the way it would happen is that under his plan, if a school was designated as failing, the kids would be trapped there for another three years and then some of them would get federal vouchers and the state would be forced to match those, that money.
Under my plan, if a school is failing, we work with the states to give them the authority and the resources to close down that school and reopen it right away with a new principal, a new faculty, a turn-around team of specialists who know what they're doing.
It's based on the plan of Governor Jim Hunt in North Carolina, and it works great.
 If I thought that there was no alternative, then I might feel differently.
But I have an obligation to fight to make sure there are no failing schools.
We have to turn around -- most schools are excellent, but we have to make sure that all of them are.
 What grade do you teach?
 High school.
I mentioned before that the local communities are having a harder time passing bond issues.
Traditionally, if you've been involved in a campaign like that, you know that the parents with kids in school are the ones that turn out and vote.
It's ironic that there are now -- there is now a smaller percentage of the voters made up of parents with children than ever in American history because of the aging of our population, but at the same time we've got the largest generation of students in public schools ever.
More than 90% of America's children go to public schools.
And it's the largest number ever this year and they'll break the record next year and every year for ten years running.
We've got to do something about this.
And local -- it's not enough to leave it up to the local school districts.
They're not able to do it and our future depends upon it.
Look, we're in an information age.
Our economic future depends upon whether or not our children are going to get the kind of education that lets them go on to college.
And again, I want to make it possible for all middle-class families to send their kids to college and more Pell grants for those who are in the lower income groups also, and then I want to make sure that we have job training on top of that and lifelong learning, but it all starts with the public school teachers.
My proposal gives $10,000 hiring bonuses for those teachers who are -- who get certified to teach in the areas where they're most needed.
Now, accountability, we basically agree on accountability.
My plan requires testing of all students.
It also requires something that Governor Bush's plan doesn't.
It requires testing of all new teachers, including in the subjects that they teach.
We have to start treating teachers like the professionals that they are, and give them the respect and the kind of quality of life that will draw more people into teaching because we need a lot more teachers.
 When you total up all the federal spending he wants to do, it's the largest increase in federal spending in years.
And there's just not going to be enough money.
I have been a governor of a big state, I have made education my number one priority.
That's what governors ought to do.
They ought to say this is the most important thing we do as a state.
The federal government puts about 6% of the money up.
They put about, you know, 60% of the strings where you have to fill out the paperwork.
I don't know if you have to be a paperwork filler-outer, but most of it's because of the federal government.
What I want to do is to send flexibility and authority to the local folks so you can choose what to do with the money.
One size does not fit all.
I worry about federalizing education if I were you.
I believe strongly that the federal government can help, we need to fund Headstart.
We need to have accountability.
The Vice President's plan does not have annual accountability, third grade, fourth grade, fifth grade.
We need to demand on results.
I believe strongly in a teacher protection act like I mentioned.
I hear from teachers all the time about the lawsuits and the threats, respect in the classroom.
Part of it's because you can't -- you can't control the classroom.
You can't have a consequence for somebody without fear of getting sued under federal law.
So I'm going to ask the Congress to pass a teacher protection act.
So I believe in flexibility, I believe in a national reading initiative for local districts to access with K through 2 diagnostic testing, curriculum that works, phonics works, by the way, it needs to be a part of our curriculum.
There needs to be flexibility for teacher training and teacher hiring with federal money.
The federal government can be a part, but don't fall prey to all this stuff about money here and money there because education is really funded at the local level.
94% comes from the local level.
 Absolutely not.
Absolutely not.
I'm so glad that I have the chance to knock that down.
Look, the problem is that under Governor Bush's plan, $1.6 trillion tax cut, mostly to the wealthy, under his own budget numbers, he proposes spending more money for a tax cut just for the wealthiest 1% than all the new money he budgets for education, health care and national defense combined.
Now under my plan we'll balance the budget every year.
I'm not just saying this.
I'm not just talking.
I have helped to balance the budget for the first time in 30 years, paid down the debt.
And under my plan, in four years, as the percentage of our gross domestic product, federal spending will be the smallest that it has been in 50 years.
One reason is, you know, the third biggest spending item in our budget is interest on the national debt?
We get nothing for it.
We keep the good faith and credit of the United States.
I will pay down the debt every single year until it is eliminated early in the next decade.
That gets rid of the third biggest intrusion of the federal government in our economy.
Now, because the governor has all this money for a tax cut mostly to the wealthy, there is no money left over, so schools get testing and lawsuit reform and not much else.
 Well, he's wrong.
(LAUGHTER) Just add up all the numbers.
It's three times bigger than what President Clinton proposed.
The Senate Budget Committee --
 That was in an ad, Jim, that was knocked down by the journalists who analyzed the ad and said it was misleading.
 My turn?
 Forget the journalists.
He proposed more than Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis combined.
This is a big spender.
And he ought to be proud of it, it's part of his record.
We just have a different philosophy.
Let me talk about tax relief.
If you pay taxes, you ought to get tax relief.
The Vice President believes only the right people ought to get tax relief.
I don't think that's the role of the president to pick you're right and you're not right.
I think if you're going to have tax relief, everybody ought to get it.
And therefore, wealthy people are going to get it.
But the top 1% will end up paying one-third of the taxes in America and they get one-fifth of the benefits.
And that's because we structured the plan so that six million additional American families pay no taxes.
If you're a family of four making $50,000 in Missouri, you get a 50% cut in your federal income taxes.
What I've done is set priorities and funded them.
And there's extra money.
And I believe the people who pay the bills ought to get some money back.
It's a difference of opinion.
He wants to grow the government and I trust you with your own money.
I wish we could spend an hour talking about trusting people.
It's just the right position to take.
 Can we take the time --
 Of course it does.
If you pay taxes, you are going to get a benefit.
People who pay taxes will get tax relief.
 Let me finish.
Under my plan, if you make -- the top -- the wealthy people pay 62% of the taxes today.
Afterwards they pay 64%.
This is a fair plan.
You know why?
Because the tax code is unfair for people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.
If you're a single mother making $22,000 a year today and you're trying to raise two children, for every additional dollar you earn you pay a higher marginal rate on that dollar than someone making $200,000, and that's not right.
So I want to do something about that.
 Yeah, look.
Look, this isn't about Governor Bush, it's not about me.
It is about you.
And I want to come back to something I said before.
If you want somebody who believes that we were better off eight years ago than we are now and that we ought to go back to the kind of policies that we had back then, emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the wealthy, here is your man.
If you want somebody who will fight for you and who will fight to have middle-class tax cuts, then I am your man.
I want to be.
Now, I doubt anybody here makes more than $330,000 a year.
I won't ask you, but if you do, you're in the top 1%.
 I'm not going to ask them.
But if everyone here in this audience was dead on in the middle of the middle-class, then the tax cuts for every single one of you all added up would be less than the tax cut his plan would give to just one member of that top wealthiest 1%.
Now you judge for yourselves whether or not that's fair.
 Good.
50 million Americans get no tax relief under his plan.
 That's not right.
 You may not be one of them, you're just not one of the right people.
And secondly, we've had enough fighting.
It's time to unite.
You talk about eight years?
In eight years they haven't gotten anything done on Medicare, on Social Security, a patient's bill of rights.
It's time to get something done.
 Hey, I've got to answer that, Jim.
 Medicare -- I cast the tie-breaking vote to add 26 years to the life of Medicare.
It was due to go bankrupt in 1999 and that 50 million figure again, the newspapers -- I said -- you said forget the journalists, but they are the keepers of the score card and whether or not you're using facts that aren't right.
And that fact is just not right.
 I've been a leader.
I've been a person who has to set a clear vision and convince people to follow.
I've got a strategy for the Middle East.
And first let me say that our nation now needs to speak with one voice during this time, and I applaud the president for working hard to diffuse tensions.
Our nation needs to be credible and strong.
When we say we're somebody's friend, everybody has got to believe it.
Israel is our friend and we'll stand by Israel.
We need to reach out to moderate Arab nations as well to build coalitions to keep the peace.
I also need -- the next leader needs to be patient.
We can't put the Middle East peace process on our timetable.
It's got to be on the timetable of the people that we're trying to bring to the peace table.
We can't dictate the terms of peace, which means that you have to be steady.
You can't worry about polls or focus groups.
You've got to have a clear vision.
That's what a leader does.
A leader also understands that the United States must be strong to keep the peace.
Saddam Hussein still is a threat in the Middle East.
Our coalition against Saddam is unraveling.
Sanctions are loosened.
The man who may be developing weapons of mass destruction, we don't know because inspectors aren't in.
So to answer your question, it requires a clear vision, a willingness to stand by our friends, and the credibility for people both friend and foe to understand when America says something, we mean it.
 I see a future when the world is at peace, with the United States of America promoting the values of democracy and human rights and freedom all around the world.
Even in Iran they have had an election that began to bring about some change.
We stand for those values and we have to be willing to assert them.
Right now our military is the strongest in the entire history of the world.
I will -- I pledge to you I will do whatever is necessary to make sure that it stays that way.
Now, what can I bring to that challenge?
When I was a young man, my father was a senator opposed to the Vietnam War.
When I graduated from college, there were plenty of fancy ways to get out of going and being a part of that.
I went and I volunteered, and I went to Vietnam.
I didn't do the most or run the greatest risk by a long shot, but I learned what it was like to be an enlisted man in the United States Army.
In the Congress, in the House of Representatives, I served on the House Intelligence Committee and I worked hard to learn the subject of nuclear arms control and how we can diffuse these tensions and deal with non-proliferation and deal with the problems of terrorism and these new weapons of mass destruction.
Look, we're gonna face some serious new challenges in the next four years.
I've worked on that long and hard.
When I went to the United States Senate, I asked for an assignment to the Armed Services Committee.
And while I was there I worked on a bipartisan basis, as I did in the House, I worked with former President Reagan on the modernization of our strategic weaponry.
In the Senate I was one of only ten Democrats, along with Senator Joe Lieberman, to support Governor Bush's dad in the Persian Gulf War Resolution.
And for the last eight years I've served on the National Security Council.
Can I say just one other thing here?
 Fine, I'll wait.
 I think he gets a -- oh, I'm sorry, you're right, go ahead.
 Thank you, sir.
Just to finish briefly, I started to say that for the last eight years I've been on the National Security Council.
Last week I broke up -- I suspended campaigning for two days, or parts of two days, to go back and participate in the meetings that charted the President's summit meeting that he just returned from earlier today.
And our team of -- our country's team over there did a great job.
It's a difficult situation.
The United States has to be strong in order to make sure that we can help promote peace and security and stability.
And that means keeping our military strong.
Now, I said earlier that we are the strongest military, but we need to continue improving readiness and making sure that our military personnel are adequately paid and that the combination of their pay and their benefits and their retirement as veterans is comparable to the stiff competition that's coming in this strong economy from the private sector.
And I have supported the largest pay raise in many a year, and I support another one now.
I also support modernization of our strategic and tactical weaponry.
The governor has proposed skipping a generation of technology.
I think that would be a mistake, because I think one of the ways we've been able to be so successful in Kosovo and Bosnia and Haiti and in other places is by having the technological edge.
You know, we won that conflict in Kosovo without losing a single human life in combat, a single American life in combat.
Now, readiness.
The trends before we -- before I got my current job were on the decline, the number of divisions were reduced.
I argued that we should reverse that trend and take it back up.
And I'm happy to tell you that we have.
Now, in my budget for the next ten years I propose $100 billion for this purpose.
The governor proposes $45 billion.
I propose more than twice as much because I think it's needed.
 If this were a spending contest, I would come in second.
I readily admit I'm not going to grow the size of the federal government like he is.
Your question was deployment.
It must be in the national interests, must be in our vital interests whether we ever send troops.
The mission must be clear.
Soldiers must understand why we're going.
The force must be strong enough so that the mission can be accomplished.
And the exit strategy needs to be well-defined.
I'm concerned that we're overdeployed around the world.
See, I think the mission has somewhat become fuzzy.
Should I be fortunate enough to earn your confidence, the mission of the United States military will be to be prepared and ready to fight and win war.
And therefore prevent war from happening in the first place.
There may be some moments when we use our troops as peacekeepers, but not often.
The Vice President mentioned my view of long-term for the military.
I want to make sure the equipment for our military is the best it can possibly be, of course.
But we have an opportunity -- we have an opportunity to use our research and development capacities, the great technology of the United States, to make our military lighter, harder to find, more lethal.
We have an opportunity, really, if you think about it, if we're smart and have got a strategic vision and a leader who understands strategic planning, to make sure that we change the terms of the battlefield of the future so we can keep the peace.
This is a peaceful nation, and I intend to keep the peace.
Spending money is one thing.
But spending money without a strategic plan can oftentimes be wasted.
First thing I'm going to do is ask the Secretary of Defense to develop a plan so we are making sure we're not spending our money on political projects, but on projects to make sure our soldiers are well-paid, well-housed, and have the best equipment in the world.
 Yes, sir.
 I'm sorry, I didn't hear that.
 I don't think the National Rifle Association ran that ad.
But let me just tell you my position on guns in general, sir, if you don't mind.
 I'm sorry.
 Well, I don't think I ran the ad.
I think somebody who doesn't want me to be president might have run that ad.
That wasn't my ad.
I think it might have been one of my opponent's ads.
Here is what I believe, sir.
I believe law-abiding citizens ought to be allowed to protect themselves and their families.
I believe that we ought to keep guns out of the hands of people that shouldn't have them.
That's why I'm for instant background checks at gun shows, I'm for trigger locks, I think that makes sense.
Matter of fact, we distributed free trigger locks in the State of Texas so that people can get them and put them on their guns to make their guns more safe.
I think we ought to raise the age at which juveniles can have a gun.
But I also believe strongly that we need to enforce laws on the books that the best way to make sure that we keep our society safe and secure is to hold people accountable for breaking the law.
If we catch somebody illegally selling a gun, there needs to be a consequence.
If we keep somebody -- you know, illegally using a gun, there needs to be a consequence.
Enforcement of law, and the federal government can help.
There is a great program called Project Exile in Richmond, Virginia, where we focused federal taxpayers' money and federal prosecutors and went after people who were illegally using guns.
To me that's how you make society the safest it can be.
And so, yeah, sometimes I agree with some of these groups in Washington and sometimes I don't.
I'm a pretty independent thinker.
The one thing I'm for is a safe society.
And I'm for enforcing laws on the books.
And that's what is going to happen should I earn your confidence.
 Well, it was not one of my ads, either, Governor.
But I am familiar with the statement, and it was made by one of the top-ranking officials of that organization.
Let me tell you my position.
I think that some common sense gun safety measures are certainly needed with the flood of cheap handguns that have sometimes been working their way into the hands of the wrong people.
But all of my proposals are focused on that problem, gun safety.
None of my proposals would have any effect on hunters, or sportsmen, or people who use rifles.
They're aimed at the real problem.
Let's make our schools safe, let's make our neighborhoods safe.
Let's have a three-day waiting period, cooling off, so we can have a background check to make sure that criminals and people who really shouldn't have guns don't get them.
But I would like to use my remaining time on this exchange, Jim, to respond to an exchange that took place just a moment ago.
Because a couple of times the governor has said that I am for a bigger government.
Governor, I'm not.
And let me tell you what the record shows.
For the last eight years I have had the challenge of running the streamlining program called Reinventing Government.
And if there are any federal employees in this group, you know what that means.
The federal government has been reduced in size by more than 300,000 people.
And it's now the smallest number that we have had since the -- the smallest in size since John Kennedy's administration.
During the last five years, Texas's government has gone up in size.
Federal government has gone down, Texas's government has gone up.
Now, my plan for the future, I see a time when we have smaller, smarter government where you don't have to wait in line because you can get services online cheaper, better, faster.
We can do that.
 We've got a bumper crop this year.
But that's the good news.
You know what the bad news is that follows on that.
The prices are low.
In the last several years, the so-called Freedom To Farm Law has, in my view, been mostly a failure.
I want to change many of its provisions.
Now, many here who are not involved in farming don't -- won't follow this, so just forgive me.
Because the 2% of the country that is involved in farming is important because the rest of us wouldn't eat except for them.
And you guys have been having a hard time, and I want to fight for you.
I want to change those provisions.
I want to restore a meaningful safety net.
And I think that you pointed the way in your comments, because when you say there are multiple things accomplished by farmers, you're specifically including conservation and protection of the environment.
And yes, farmers are the first environmentalists.
And when they decide not to plow a field that is vulnerable to soil erosion, that may cost them a little money, but it helps the environment.
I think that we ought to have an expanded conservation reserve program.
And I think that the environmental benefits that come from sound management of the land ought to represent a new way for farmers to get some income that will enable them -- enable you to make sensible choices in crop rotation, and when you leave the land fallow and the rest.
Now, I'll go beyond that and say I think we need much more focus on rural economic development programs.
I see a time when the Internet-based activities are more available in the rural areas and where the extra source of income that farm families used to have from shoe factories is replaced by an extra source of income from working in the information economy.
So we need to do a lot of things, but we ought to start with a better safety net.
 I would like our farmers feeding the world.
We're the best producers in the world, and I want -- I want the farmers feeding the world.
We need to open up markets.
Exports are down, and every time an export number goes down, it hurts the farmer.
I want the next president to have fast track negotiating authority to open up markets around the world.
Were the best and the most efficient farmers.
I don't want to use food as a diplomatic weapon from this point forward.
We shouldn't be using food.
It hurts the farmers.
It's not the right thing to do.
I'm for value-added processing.
We need more work on value-added processing.
You take the raw product you produce, I presume you're a farmer, off your farm, and you convert it.
Value-added processing is important.
I'm for research and development.
Spending research and development money so that we can use our technological base to figure out new uses for farm products.
I'm for getting rid of the death tax, completely getting rid of the death tax.
One reason family farmers are forced to sell early is because of the death tax.
This is a bad tax.
The President shouldn't have vetoed that bill.
It's a tax that taxes people twice.
It penalizes the family farmer.
So should I be fortunate enough to earn your vote, I also understand -- I want to open up markets, but I also understand that farming is a part of our national security.
I'm from a big farm state.
We're the second biggest state -- farming state in the country.
And I hear from my farmers and friends all the time.
The Vice President is right, by the way.
Every day is earth day if you own the land.
I like the policies that will encourage farmers to put -- set aside land as well for conservation purposes.
Thank you.
 Yeah.
I'm for a massive reform of the estate tax or the death tax.
And under the plan that I've proposed, 80% of all family farms will be completely exempt from the estate tax.
And the vast majority of all family businesses would be completely exempt, and all of the others would have sharply reduced.
So 80% -- now the problem with completely eliminating it goes back to the wealthiest 1%.
The amount of money that has to be raised in taxes for middle-class families to make up for completely eliminating that on the very wealthiest, the billionaires, that would be an extra heavy burden on middle-class families.
And so let's do it for most all, but not completely eliminate it for the very top.
 Eliminating the death tax.
 Because people shouldn't be taxed twice on their assets.
It's either unfair for some or unfair for all.
Again, this is just a difference of opinion.
If you're from Washington, you want to pick and choose winners.
I don't think that's the role of the president.
I think if you're going to have tax relief, everybody benefits.
Secondly, I think your plan -- a lot of fine print in your plan, Mr. Vice President, with all due respect.
It is -- I'm not so sure 80% of the people get the death tax.
I know this, 100% will get it if I'm the president.
I just don't think it's fair to tax people's assets twice regardless of your status.
It's a fairness issue.
It's an issue of principle, not politics.
 Hi, Joyce.
 Appreciate that question.
Laura and I are proud parents of teenage girls, twin daughters, and I know what you're saying.
Government ought to stand on the side of parents.
Parents are teaching their children right from wrong, and the message oftentimes gets undermined by the popular culture.
You bet there's things that government can do.
We can work with the entertainment industry to provide family hour.
We can have filters on Internets where public money is spent.
There ought to be filters in public libraries and filters in public schools so if kids get on the Internet, there is not going to be pornography or violence coming in.
I think we ought to have character education in our schools.
I know that doesn't directly talk about Hollywood, but it does reinforce the values you're teaching.
Greatly expand character education funding so that public schools will teach children values, values which have stood the test of time.
There's afterschool money available.
I think that afterschool money ought to be available for faith-based programs and charitable programs that exist because somebody has heard the call to love a neighbor like you would like to be loved yourself.
That will help reinforce the values that parents teach at home as well.
Ours is a great land, and one of the reasons why is because we're free.
And so I don't support censorship.
But I do believe that we ought to talk plainly to the Hollywood moguls and people who produce this stuff and explain the consequences.
I think we need to have rating systems that are clear.
I happen to like the idea of having technology for the TV, easy for parents to use so you can tune out these programs you don't want in your house.
I'll remind mothers and dads the best weapon is the off/on button, and paying attention to your children, and eating dinner with them and being -- I'm sorry.
I was on my peroration.
 My turn.
 I care a lot about this.
It's not just movies; television, video games, music, the Internet.
Parents now feel like you have to compete with the mass culture in order to raise your kids with the values that you want them to have.
Tipper and I have four children.
And God bless them, every one of them decided on their own to come here this evening.
I don't want to embarrass our oldest daughter.
She and her husband made us grandparents almost a year-and-a-half ago, and yet if she'll forgive me, when she was little, she brought a record home that had some awful lyrics in it and Tipper hit the ceiling.
And that launched a campaign to try to get the record companies to put ratings that -- warning labels for parents.
And I'm so proud of what she accomplished in getting them on there.
I've been involved myself in negotiating and helping to move along the negotiations with the Internet service providers to get a parents' protection page every time 95% of the pages come up.
And a feature that allows parents to automatically check with one click what sites your kids have visited lately.
You know, some parents are worried about those filters, that you will have to ask your kids how to put them on there.
But if you can check up on them, that's real power.
And recently the Federal Trade Commission pointed out that some of these entertainment companies have warned parents that the material is inappropriate for children, and then they've turned around behind the backs of the parents and advertised that same adult material directly to children.
That is an outrage.
Joe Lieberman and I gave them six months to clean up their act.
And if they don't do it, we're gonna ask for tougher authority in the hands of the FTC on the false and deceptive advertising.
I'll tell you this, I want to do something about this.
Respect the First Amendment, but I will do something to help you raise your kids without that garbage.
 Right next to the last.
 We've got to change it.
I spend a good deal of time talking to young people, and in my standard speech out there on the stump I usually end my speech by saying, I want to ask you for something and I want to direct it especially to the young people in the audience.
And I want to tell you what I tell them.
Sometimes people who are very idealistic and have great dreams, as young people do, are apt to stay at arm's length from the political process because they think their good hearts might be brittle, and if they invest their hopes and allow themselves to believe, then they're gonna be let down and disappointed.
But thank goodness we've always had enough people who have been willing in every generation to push past the fear of a broken heart and become deeply involved in forming a more perfect union.
We're America, and we believe in our future and we know we have the ability to shape our future.
Now, we've got to address one of the biggest threats to our democracy.
And that is the current campaign financing system.
And I know they say it doesn't rank anywhere on the polls.
I don't believe that's a fair measure.
I'm telling you, I will make it the -- I will make the McCain-Feingold Campaign Finance Reform bill the very first measure that I send to the Congress as president.
Governor Bush opposes it.
I wish that he would consider changing his mind on that.
Because I think that the special interests have too much power, and we need to give our democracy back to the American people.
Let me tell you why.
Those issues you mentioned, Social Security, prescription drugs, the big drug companies are against the prescription drug proposal that I've made.
The HMOs are against the patient's rights bill, the Dingle-Norwood bill that I support, and that Gov.
Bush does not support.
The big oil companies are against the measures to get more energy independence and renewable fuel.
They ought to have their voices heard, but they shouldn't have a big megaphone that drowns out the American people.
We need campaign finance reform and we need to shoot straight with young and old alike and tell them what the real choices are.
And we can renew and rekindle the American spirit and make our future what our founders dreamed it could be.
We can.
 Tell you what I hear.
A lot of people are sick and tired of the bitterness in Washington, D.C. and therefore they don't want any part of politics.
They look at Washington and see people pointing fingers and casting blame and saying one thing and doing another.
There's a lot of young folks saying, you know, why do I want to be involved with this mess?
And what I think needs to happen in order to encourage the young to become involved is to shoot straight, is to set aside the partisan differences, and set an agenda that will make sense.
Medicare, I know you talked about it, but Medicare is relevant for all of us, young and old alike.
We better get it right now.
Tax reform is relevant for old and young alike.
I don't think it's the issues that turn kids off.
I think it's the tone.
I think it's the attitude.
I think it's a cynicism in Washington and it doesn't have to be that way.
Before I decided to run, I had to resolve two issues in my mind.
One, could our family endure all this business.
And I came to the conclusion that our love was strong enough to be able to do it.
The other was could an administration change the tone in Washington, D.C. And I believe the answer is yes, otherwise I wouldn't be asking for your vote.
That's what happened in Texas.
We worked together.
There is a man here in this audience named Hugo Berlanga.
He is the chairman of the health committee.
He came here for a reason, to tout our record on health in Texas.
He's a Democrat.
I didn't care whether he was a Republican or Democrat.
What I cared about is could we work together.
That's what Washington, D.C. needs.
And finally, sir, to answer your question, you need somebody in office who will tell the truth.
That's the best way to get people back in the system.
 Hi, Norma.
 I've had a record of bringing people from all walks of life into my administration, and my administration is better off for it in Texas.
I'm going to find people that want to serve their country.
But I want a diverse administration, I think it's important.
I've worked hard in the State of Texas to make sure our institutions reflect the state with good, smart policy.
Policy that rejects quotas.
I don't like quotas.
Quotas tend to pit one group of people against another.
Quotas are bad for America.
It's not the way America is all about.
But policies that give people a helping hand so they can help themselves.
For example, in our State of Texas I worked with the legislature, both Republicans and Democrats, to pass a law that said if you come in the top 10% of your high school class, you're automatically admitted to one of our higher institutions of learning, college.
And as a result, our universities are now more diverse.
It was a smart thing to do.
What I called it, I labeled it affirmative access.
I think the contracting business in government can help.
Not with quotas, but help meet a goal of ownership of small businesses, for example.
The contracts need to be smaller, the agencies need to be -- need to recruit and to work hard to find people to bid on the state contracts.
I think we can do that in a way that represents what America is all about, which is equal opportunity and an opportunity for people to realize their potential.
So to answer your question, I support, I guess the way to put it, is affirmative access.
I'll have an administration that will make you proud.
Thank you.
 I believe in this goal and effort with all my heart.
I believe that our future as a nation depends upon whether or not we can break down these barriers that have been used to pit group against group, and bring our people together.
How do you do it?
Well, you establish respect for differences.
You don't ignore differences.
It's all too easy for somebody in the majority in the population to say oh, we're just all the same, without an understanding of the different life experience that you've had, that others have had.
Once you have that understanding and mutual respect, then we can transcend the differences and embrace the highest common denominator of the American spirit.
I don't know what affirmative access means.
I do know what affirmative action means.
I know the governor is against it, and I know that I'm for it.
I know what a hate crime statute pending at the national level is all about in the aftermath of James Byrd's death.
I'm for that proposed law, the governor is against it.
I know what it means to have a commitment to diversity.
I am part of an administration that has the finest record on diversity.
And incidentally, an excellent -- I mean, I think our success over the last eight years has not been in spite of diversity but because of it.
Because we're able to draw on the wisdom and experience from different parts of the society that hadn't been tapped in the same way before.
And incidentally, Mel Carnahan in Missouri had the finest record on diversity in any governor in the entire history of the State of Missouri.
And I want to honor that among his other achievements here.
Now, I just believe that what we have to do is enforce the civil rights laws.
I'm against quotas.
This is, with all due respect, Governor, that's a red herring.
Affirmative action isn't quotas.
I'm against quotas, they're illegal.
They're against the American way.
Affirmative action means that you take extra steps to acknowledge the history of discrimination and injustice and prejudice and bring all people into the American dream because it helps everybody, not just those who are directly benefitting.
 If affirmative action means quotas, I'm against it.
If affirmative action means what I just described what I'm for, then I'm for it.
You heard what I was for.
The vice president keeps saying I'm against things.
You heard what I was for, and that's what I support.
 He said if affirmative action means quotas, he's against it.
Affirmative action doesn't mean quotas.
Are you for it without quotas?
 I may not be for your version, Mr. Vice President, but I'm for what I just described to the lady.
 Are you for what the Supreme Court says is a constitutional way of having affirmative action?
 I think that speaks for itself.
 No, it doesn't speak for itself, Mr. Vice President, it speaks for the fact that there are certain rules in this that we all agree to, but evidently rules don't mean anything.
 If you make less than $60,000 a year and you decide to invest $1,000 in a savings account, you'll get a tax credit, which means in essence that the federal government will match your $1,000 with another $1,000.
If you make less than $30,000 a year and you put $500 in a savings account, the federal government will match it with $1500.
If you make more than $60,000 and up to 100 you'll still get a match, but not as generous.
You'll get an access to life-long learning and education, help with tuition if you want to get a new skill or training.
If you want to purchase health insurance, you will get help with that.
If you want to participate in some of the dynamic changes that are going on in our country, you will get specific help in doing that.
If you are part of the -- of the bottom 20% or so of wage earners, then you will get an expanded earned income tax credit.
Now, the tax relief that I propose is directed specifically at middle-income individuals and families.
And if you have a -- if you have an elderly parent or grandparent who needs long-term care, then you will get help with that.
$3,000 tax credit to help your expenses in taking care of a loved one who needs long-term care.
 Let me just say the first -- this business about the entitlement he tried to describe about savings, you know, matching savings here and matching savings there, fully-funded it's gonna cost a whole lot of money, a lot more than we have.
You're going to get a tax relief in my plan.
You're not going to be targeted in or targeted out.
Everybody that pays taxes is going to get tax relief.
If you take care of an elderly in your home, you're going to get the personal exemption increased.
I think also what you need to think about is not the immediate, but what about Medicare?
You get a plan that will include prescription drugs, a plan that will give you options.
Now, I hope people understand that Medicare today is important, but it doesn't keep up with the new medicines.
If you're a Medicare person, on Medicare, you don't get the new procedures.
You're stuck in a time warp in many ways.
So it will be a modern Medicare system that trusts you to make a variety of options for you.
You're going to live in a peaceful world.
It will be a world of peace because we're going to have a clear sight of foreign policy based upon a strong military and a mission that stands by our friends.
A mission that doesn't try to be all things to all people.
A judicious use of the military which will help keep the peace.
You'll live in a world, hopefully, that is more educated so it's less likely you'll be harmed in your neighborhood.
See, an educated child is one much more likely to be hopeful and optimistic.
You'll be in a world in which fits into my philosophy.
The harder you work, the more you can keep.
It's the American way.
Government shouldn't be a heavy hand.
It's what the federal government does to you.
It should be a helping hand, and tax relief and the proposals I just described should be a good helping hand.
 No, I'm not proud of that.
The death penalty is a very serious business, Leo.
It's an issue that good people obviously disagree on.
I take my job seriously.
And if you think I was proud of it, I think you misread me, I do.
I was sworn to uphold the laws of my state.
During the course of the campaign in 1994 I was asked do you support the death penalty.
I said I did if administered fairly and justly.
Because I believe it saves lives, Leo, I do.
If it's administered swiftly, justly and fairly, it saves lives.
One of the things that happens when you're a governor, at least oftentimes you have to make tough decisions.
You can't let public persuasion sway you, because the job is to enforce the law.
And that's what I did, sir.
There have been some tough cases come across my desk.
Some of the hardest moments since I've been the governor of the State of Texas is to deal with those cases.
But my job is to ask two questions, sir.
Is the person guilty of the crime?
And did the person have full access to the courts of law?
And I can tell you looking at you right now, in all cases those answers were affirmative.
I'm not proud of any record.
I'm proud of the fact that violent crime is down in the State of Texas.
I'm proud of the fact that we hold people accountable.
But I'm not proud of any record, sir, I'm not.
 I support the death penalty.
I think that it has to be administered not only fairly with attention to things like DNA evidence, which I think should be used in all capital cases, but also with very careful attention.
If, for example, somebody confesses to the crime and somebody is waiting on death row, there has to be alertness to say wait a minute, have we got the wrong guy?
If the wrong guy is put to death, then that's a double tragedy.
Not only has an innocent person been executed, but the real perpetrator of the crime has not been held accountable for it.
And in some cases may be still at large.
But I support the death penalty in the most heinous cases.
 I do.
It's the only reason to be for it.
Let me finish, sir.
I don't think you should support the death penalty to seek revenge.
I don't think that's right.
I think the reason to support the death penalty is because it saves other people's lives.
 I think it is a deterrent.
I know that's a controversial view, but I do believe it's a deterrent.
 Yes.
(LAUGHTER) I am a person who keeps promises.
And, you know, we've heard a lot about -- from the governor about not much being done in the last eight years, as if the promises that I made eight years ago have not been kept.
I think the record shows otherwise.
We have gone from the biggest deficits eight years ago to the biggest surpluses in history today.
Instead of high unemployment, we now have the lowest African-American unemployment, the lowest Latino unemployment ever measured.
22 million new jobs, very low unemployment nationally.
Instead of ballooning the debt and multiplying it four times over, we have seen the debt actually begun to be paid down.
Here are some promises that I'll make to you now.
I will balance the budget every year.
I will pay down the debt every year.
I will give middle-class Americans tax cuts, meaningful ones.
And I will invest in education, health care, protecting the environment and retirement security.
We both made promises in this campaign.
I promise you I will keep mine.
Let me tell you about one of the governor's.
He has promised a trillion dollars out of the Social Security Trust Fund for young working adults to invest and save on their own.
But he's promised seniors that their Social Security benefits will not be cut, and he's promised the same trillion dollars to them.
So this is a show me state.
Reminds me of the line from the movie, "Show me the money."
Which one of those promises will you keep and which will you break, Governor?
 Thank you for your question.
(LAUGHTER) I -- there's an old high school debating trick, which is to answer something and then attack your opponent at the end.
You asked about promises.
You were promised that Medicare would be reformed, and that Social Security would be reformed.
You were promised a middle-class tax cut in 1992.
It didn't happen.
There's too much bitterness in Washington.
There's too much wrangling.
It's time to have a fresh start.
One of the reasons I was successful as the governor of Texas is because I didn't try to be all things to all people.
When I campaigned in a race, a lot of folks didn't think I could win including, by the way, my mother.
(LAUGHTER) I said I'd do four things; tort reform, education reform, welfare reform and juvenile justice reform.
And I won.
And I had the will of the people in my state behind me.
And then I brought folks together to get it done.
And that's what we need, I think, in this election.
To me that's what it's all about.
I'm sure your 6th grade kids are listening and saying, these guys will say anything to get elected.
But there's a record, and that's what I hope people look at.
One of my promises is going to be Social Security reform, and you bet, we need to take a trillion dollars out of that $2.4 trillion surplus.
Now remember, Social Security revenue exceeds expenses up until 2015.
People are going to get paid.
But if you're a younger worker, if you're younger, you better hope this country thinks differently, otherwise you're gonna be faced with huge payroll taxes or reduced benefits.
And you bet we're gonna take a trillion dollars of your own money and let you invest it under safe guidelines so you get a better rate of return on the money than the paltry 2% that the federal government gets for you today.
That's one of my promises.
But it's gonna require people to bring both Republicans and Democrats together to get it done.
That's what it requires.
There was a chance to get this done.
It was a bipartisan approach, but it's been rejected.
I'm going to bring them together.
 Well, first of all, Jim, I would like to respond to what the governor just said.
Because the trillion dollars that has been promised to young people has also been promised to older people.
And you cannot keep both promises.
If you're in your mid-40's under the governor's plan, Social Security will be bankrupt by the time you retire, if he takes it out of the Social Security Trust Fund.
Under my plan it will be -- its solvency will be extended until you're 100.
Now that is the difference.
And the governor may not want to answer that question, he may want to call it a high school debating trick, but let me tell you this.
This election is not about debating tricks, it is about your future.
The reason Social Security -- he says it gets 2%.
You know, it's not a bank account that just pays back money that's invested.
It is also used to give your mothers and fathers the Social Security checks that they live on.
If you take a trillion dollars out of that Social Security Trust Fund, how are the checks going to be -- how are you going to keep faith with the seniors?
Now let me come directly to your question.
 Well, can I answer that?
One reason people are skeptical is because people don't answer the questions they've been asked.
The trillion dollars comes out of the surplus so that you can invest some of your own money.
There's just a difference of opinion.
I want workers to have their own assets.
It's who you trust, government or people.
 Thank you very much, Jim, and I'll begin by answering your questions -- your last question.
I believe that a lot of people are skeptical about people in politics today because we have seen a time of great challenge for our country.
Since the assassination of our best leaders in the '60's, since the Vietnam War, since Watergate, and because we need campaign finance reform.
I would like to tell you something about me.
I keep my word.
I have kept the faith.
I've kept the faith with my country.
I volunteered for the Army.
I served in Vietnam.
I kept the faith with my family.
Tipper and I have been married for 30 years.
We have devoted ourselves to our children and now our nearly one-and-a-half-year-old grandson.
I have kept the faith with our country.
Nine times I have raised my hand to take an oath to the Constitution, and I have never violated that oath.
I have not spent the last quarter century in pursuit of personal wealth.
I have spent the last quarter century fighting for middle-class working men and women in the United States of America.
I believe very deeply that you have to be willing to stand up and fight no matter what powerful forces might be on the other side.
If you want somebody who is willing to fight for you, I am asking for your support and your vote and, yes, your confidence and your willingness to believe that we can do the right thing in America, and be the better for it.
We've made some progress during the last eight years.
We have seen the strongest economy in the history of the United States.
Lower crime rates for eight years in a row.
Highest private home ownership ever, but I'll make you one promise here.
You ain't seen nothing yet.
And I will keep that promise.
 Well, Jim, I want to thank you and thank the folks here at Washington University and the vice president.
Appreciate the chance to have a good, honest dialogue about our differences of opinion.
I think after three debates the good people of this country understand there is a difference of opinion.
There is a difference between big federal government and somebody who is coming from outside of Washington who will trust individuals.
I've got an agenda that I want to get done for the country.
It's an agenda that says we're going to reform Medicare to make sure seniors have got prescription drugs and to give seniors different options from which they can choose.
It's an agenda that says we're listen to the young voices in Social Security and say we're going to think differently about making sure we have a system, but also fulfill the promise to the seniors in America.
A promise made will be a promise kept should I be fortunate enough to become your president.
I want to have the military keeping the peace.
I want to make sure the public school system in America keeps its promise so not one child is left behind.
After setting priorities, I want to give some of your money back.
I don't think the surplus is the government's money.
I think it's the people's money.
I don't think the surplus exists because of the ingenuity and hard work of the federal government, I think it exists because of the ingenuity and hard work of the American people.
And you ought to have some of this surplus so you can save and dream and build.
I look forward to the final weeks of this campaign.
I'm asking for your vote.
For those of you for me, thanks for your help.
For those of you for my opponent, please only vote once.
(LAUGHTER) But for those who have not made up their mind, I would like to conclude by this promise.
Should I be fortunate enough to become your president, when I put my hand on the Bible, I will swear to not only uphold the laws of the land, but I will also swear to uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I have been elected, so help me God.
Thank you very much.
 Well, first of all, Bob, thank you for moderating tonight.
 Bob, thank you very much.
 Yes.
When the president had an opportunity to capture or kill Osama bin Laden, he took his focus off of them, outsourced the job to Afghan warlords, and Osama bin Laden escaped.
 Gosh, I just don't think I ever said I'm not worried about Osama bin Laden.
It's kind of one of those exaggerations.
 Bob, we relied upon a company out of England to provide about half of the flu vaccines for the United States citizen, and it turned out that the vaccine they were producing was contaminated.
And so we took the right action and didn't allow contaminated medicine into our country.
We're working with Canada to hopefully -- that they'll produce a -- help us realize the vaccine necessary to make sure our citizens have got flu vaccinations during this upcoming season.
 This really underscores the problem with the American health-care system.
It's not working for the American family.
And it's gotten worse under President Bush over the course of the last years.
 I would.
Thank you.
 Thank you.
 Actually, it's not an empty promise.
 I'll tell you exactly how I can do it: by reinstating what President Bush took away, which is called pay as you go.
 Well, his rhetoric doesn't match his record.
 I'd say, Bob, I've got policies to continue to grow our economy and create the jobs of the 21st century.
And here's some help for you to go get an education.
Here's some help for you to go to a community college.
 I want you to notice how the president switched away from jobs and started talking about education principally.
 I don't blame them entirely for it.
I blame the president for the things the president could do that has an impact on it.
 Whew!
 Bob, anybody can play with these votes.
Everybody knows that.
 Senator, no one's playing with your votes.
You voted to increase taxes 98 times.
When they voted -- when they proposed reducing taxes, you voted against it 126 times.
 You know, Bob, I don't know.
I just don't know.
I do know that we have a choice to make in America and that is to treat people with tolerance and respect and dignity.
It's important that we do that.
 We're all God's children, Bob.
And I think if you were to talk to Dick Cheney's daughter, who is a lesbian, she would tell you that she's being who she was, she's being who she was born as.
 I respect their views.
I completely respect their views.
I am a Catholic.
And I grew up learning how to respect those views.
But I disagree with them, as do many.
 I think it's important to promote a culture of life.
I think a hospitable society is a society where every being counts and every person matters.
I believe the ideal world is one in which every child is protected in law and welcomed to life.
I understand there's great differences on this issue of abortion, but I believe reasonable people can come together and put good law in place that will help reduce the number of abortions.
 Gosh, I sure hope it's not the administration.
 The reason health-care costs are getting higher, one of the principal reasons is that this administration has stood in the way of common-sense efforts that would have reduced the costs.
Let me give you a prime example.
 I think it's important, since he talked about the Medicare plan, has he been in the United States Senate for 20 years?
He has no record on reforming of health care.
No record at all.
 Once again, the president is misleading America.
I've actually passed 56 individual bills that I've personally written and, in addition to that, and not always under my name, there is amendments on certain bills.
 Well, two leading national news networks have both said the president's characterization of my health-care plan is incorrect.
One called it fiction.
The other called it untrue.
 In all due respect, I'm not so sure it's credible to quote leading news organizations about -- oh, never mind.
Anyway, let me quote the Lewin report.
The Lewin report is a group of folks who are not politically affiliated.
They analyzed the senator's plan.
It cost $1.2 trillion.
 The president just said that government-run health care results in poor quality.
 Talk about the VA: We've increased VA funding by $22 billion in the four years since I've been president.
That's twice the amount that my predecessor increased VA funding.
 First, let me make sure that every senior listening today understands that when we're talking about reforming Social Security, that they'll still get their checks.
 You just heard the president say that young people ought to be able to take money out of Social Security and put it in their own accounts.
 Not at all.
Absolutely not, Bob.
This is the same thing we heard -- remember, I appeared on "Meet the Press" with Tim Russert in 1990-something.
We heard the same thing.
We fixed it.
 He forgot to tell you he voted to tax Social Security benefits more than one time.
I didn't hear any plan to fix Social Security.
I heard more of the same.
 I see it as a serious problem.
I see it as a security issue, I see it as an economic issue, and I see it as a human-rights issue.
 Let me just answer one part of the last question quickly, and then I'll come to immigration.
 Well, to say that the borders are not as protected as they were prior to September the 11th shows he doesn't know the borders.
They're much better protected today than they were when I was the governor of Texas.
 Four thousand people a day are coming across the border.
 Well, I'm glad you raised that question.
 Actually, Mitch McConnell had a minimum-wage plan that I supported that would have increased the minimum wage.
 What he's asking me is, will I have a litmus test for my judges?
And the answer is, no, I will not have a litmus test.
I will pick judges who will interpret the Constitution, but I'll have no litmus test.
 Is that a new question or a 30-second question?
 Which time limit.
.
.
 Thank you very much.
 Two things.
One, he clearly has a litmus test for his judges, which I disagree with.
 You don't measure it by a percentage increase.
Mr. President, you measure it by whether you're getting the job done.
 Well, I think the fact that they're facing these repeated call-ups, some of them two and three deployments, and there's a stop- loss policy that prevents people from being able to get out when their time was up, is a reflection of the bad judgment this president exercised in how he has engaged in the world and deployed our forces.
 The best way to take the pressure off our troops is to succeed in Iraq, is to train Iraqis so they can do the hard work of democracy, is to give them a chance to defend their country, which is precisely what we're doing.
We'll have 125,000 troops trained by the end of this year.
 I have never suggested a test where we turn over our security to any nation.
In fact, I've said the opposite: I will never turn the security of the United States over to any nation.
No nation will ever have a veto over us.
 In 1990, there was a vast coalition put together to run Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait.
The international community, the international world said this is the right thing to do, but when it came time to authorize the use of force on the Senate floor, my opponent voted against the use of force.
 Actually, I made my intentions -- made my views clear.
I did think we ought to extend the assault weapons ban, and was told the fact that the bill was never going to move, because Republicans and Democrats were against the assault weapon ban, people of both parties.
I believe law-abiding citizens ought to be able to own a gun.
I believe in background checks at gun shows or anywhere to make sure that guns don't get in the hands of people that shouldn't have them.
 I believe it was a failure of presidential leadership not to reauthorize the assault weapons ban.
 No, Bob, regrettably, we have not moved far enough along.
 Well, first of all, it is just not true that I haven't met with the Black Congressional Caucus.
I met with the Black Congressional Caucus at the White House.
 Well, I respect everything that the president has said and certainly respect his faith.
I think it's important and I share it.
I think that he just said that freedom is a gift from the Almighty.
 Very much so.
 My biggest disappointment in Washington is how partisan the town is.
I had a record of working with Republicans and Democrats as the governor of Texas, and I was hopeful I'd be able to do the same thing.
 To listen to them.
 Well, I guess the president and you and I are three examples of lucky people who married up.
 My fellow Americans, as you heard from Bob Schieffer a moment ago, America is being tested by division.
More than ever, we need to be united as a country.
 In the Oval Office, there's a painting by a friend of Laura and mine named -- by Tom Lee.
And it's a West Texas painting, a painting of a mountain scene.
 Well, let -- let me say, Bob, thank you.
 Well, what about the citizen that stayed in their homes?
That paid their mortgage payments?
It doesn't help that person in their home if the next door neighbor's house is abandoned.
And so we've got to reverse this.
We ought to put the homeowners first.
And I am disappointed that Secretary Paulson and others have not made that their first priority.
 Well, first of all, I want to thank Hofstra University and the people of New York for hosting us tonight and it's wonderful to join Senator McCain again, and thank you, Bob.
 No.
I would like to mention that a couple days ago Senator Obama was out in Ohio and he had an encounter with a guy who's a plumber, his name is Joe Wurzelbacher.
 That's what Joe believes.
 He has been watching ads of Senator McCain's.
Let me tell you what I'm actually going to do.
I think tax policy is a major difference between Senator McCain and myself.
And we both want to cut taxes, the difference is who we want to cut taxes for.
 Now, the conversation I had with Joe the plumber, what I essentially said to him was, "Five years ago, when you were in a position to buy your business, you needed a tax cut then."
 You know, when Senator Obama ended up his conversation with Joe the plumber -- we need to spread the wealth around.
In other words, we're going to take Joe's money, give it to Senator Obama, and let him spread the wealth around.
 OK. Can I...
 We're not going to do that in my administration.
 If I can answer the question.
Number one, I want to cut taxes for 95 percent of Americans.
Now, it is true that my friend and supporter, Warren Buffett, for example, could afford to pay a little more in taxes in order...
 We're talking about Joe the plumber.
OBAMA: ... in order to give -- in order to give additional tax cuts to Joe the plumber before he was at the point where he could make $250,000.
 Nobody likes taxes.
Let's not raise anybody's taxes.
OK?
 Well, I don't mind paying a little more.
 The fact is that businesses in America today are paying the second highest tax rate of anywhere in the world.
Our tax rate for business in America is 35 percent.
Ireland, it's 11 percent.
 Well, first of all, I think it's important for the American public to understand that the $750 billion rescue package, if it's structured properly, and, as president, I will make sure it's structured properly, means that ultimately taxpayers get their money back, and that's important to understand.
 Absolutely.
So let me get to that.
What I want to emphasize, though, is that I have been a strong proponent of pay-as- you-go.
Every dollar that I've proposed, I've proposed an additional cut so that it matches.
 And some of the cuts, just to give you an example, we spend $15 billion a year on subsidies to insurance companies.
It doesn't -- under the Medicare plan -- it doesn't help seniors get any better.
It's not improving our health care system.
It's just a giveaway.
 Well, thank you, Bob.
I just want to get back to this home ownership.
During the Depression era, we had a thing called the home ownership loan corporation.
 But -- OK. All right.
 Energy -- well, first -- second of all, energy independence.
We have to have nuclear power.
We have to stop sending $700 billion a year to countries that don't like us very much.
It's wind, tide, solar, natural gas, nuclear, off-shore drilling, which Senator Obama has opposed.
 I have fought against -- well, one of them would be the marketing assistance program.
Another one would be a number of subsidies for ethanol.
 ... including $3 million for an overhead projector in a planetarium in his hometown.
That's not the way we cut -- we'll cut out all the pork.
 Well, look, I think that we do have a disagreement about an across-the-board spending freeze.
It sounds good.
It's proposed periodically.
It doesn't happen.
 And we are now looking at a deficit of well over half a trillion dollars.
 Sure I do.
And let me tell you...
 Yes.
Senator Obama, I am not President Bush.
If you wanted to run against President Bush, you should have run four years ago.
I'm going to give a new direction to this economy in this country.
 ... reduce this -- I can -- we can do it with this kind of job creation of energy independence.
 Well, there's a lot of stuff that was put out there, so let me try to address it.
First of all, in terms of standing up to the leaders of my party, the first major bill that I voted on in the Senate was in support of tort reform, which wasn't very popular with trial lawyers, a major constituency in the Democratic Party.
I support...
 An overwhelming vote.
 I support charter schools and pay for performance for teachers.
Doesn't make me popular with the teachers union.
I support clean coal technology.
Doesn't make me popular with environmentalists.
So I've got a history of reaching across the aisle.
 Let me just say, Bob.
 OK.
But it's very clear that I have disagreed with the Bush administration.
I have disagreed with leaders of my own party.
I've got the scars to prove it.
 Senator Obama, your argument for standing up to the leadership of your party isn't very convincing.
 Well, this has been a tough campaign.
It's been a very tough campaign.
And I know from my experience in many campaigns that, if Senator Obama had asked -- responded to my urgent request to sit down, and do town hall meetings, and come before the American people, we could have done at least 10 of them by now.
 Well, look, you know, I think that we expect presidential campaigns to be tough.
I think that, if you look at the record and the impressions of the American people -- Bob, your network just did a poll, showing that two-thirds of the American people think that Senator McCain is running a negative campaign versus one-third of mine.
 It's not true.
 It absolutely is true.
And, now, I think the American people are less interested in our hurt feelings during the course of the campaign than addressing the issues that matter to them so deeply.
 Well, if you'll turn on the television, as I -- I watched the Arizona Cardinals defeat the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday.
 Congratulations.
 Every other ad -- ever other ad was an attack ad on my health care plan.
And any objective observer has said it's not true.
You're running ads right now that say that I oppose federal funding for stem cell research.
I don't.
 I mean, look, if we want to talk about Congressman Lewis, who is an American hero, he, unprompted by my campaign, without my campaign's awareness, made a statement that he was troubled with what he was hearing at some of the rallies that your running mate was holding, in which all the Republican reports indicated were shouting, when my name came up, things like "terrorist" and "kill him," and that you're running mate didn't mention, didn't stop, didn't say "Hold on a second, that's kind of out of line."
 You've got to read what he said...
 Let -- let -- let... MCCAIN: You've got to read what he said.
 Let me -- let me complete...
 ... my response.
I do think that he inappropriately drew a comparison between what was happening there and what had happened during the civil rights movement, and we immediately put out a statement saying that we don't think that comparison is appropriate.
 I cannot...
 We can have serious differences about our health care policy, for example, John, because we do have a difference on health care policy, but we...
 We do and I hope...
 ... talking about it this evening.
 Sure.
 But when people suggest that I pal around with terrorists, then we're not talking about issues.
What we're talking about...
 Well, let me just say I would...
 Let me just say categorically I'm proud of the people that come to our rallies.
Whenever you get a large rally of 10,000, 15,000, 20,000 people, you're going to have some fringe peoples.
You know that.
And I've -- and we've always said that that's not appropriate.
 John, I...
 ... unacceptable.
So the point is -- the point is that I have repudiated every time someone's been out of line, whether they've been part of my campaign or not, and I will continue to do that.
 Well, look, Bob, as I said...
 You know, here's what I would say.
I mean, we can have a debate back and forth about the merits of each other's campaigns.
I suspect we won't agree here tonight.
 And what is important is making sure that we disagree without being disagreeable.
And it means that we can have tough, vigorous debates around issues.
What we can't do, I think, is try to characterize each other as bad people.
And that has been a culture in Washington that has been taking place for too long.
And I think...
 Well, Bob, you asked me a direct question.
 Yes, real quick.
Mr. Ayers, I don't care about an old washed-up terrorist.
But as Senator Clinton said in her debates with you, we need to know the full extent of that relationship.
 Bob, I think it's going to be important to just -- I'll respond to these two particular allegations that Senator McCain has made and that have gotten a lot of attention.
 Well, again, while you were on the board of the Woods Foundation, you and Mr. Ayers, together, you sent $230,000 to ACORN.
So -- and you launched your political campaign in Mr. Ayers' living room.
 That's absolutely not true.
 And the facts are facts and records are records.
 And that's not the facts.
 And it's not the fact -- it's not the fact that Senator Obama chooses to associate with a guy who in 2001 said that he wished he had have bombed more, and he had a long association with him.
It's the fact that all the -- all of the details need to be known about Senator Obama's relationship with them and with ACORN and the American people will make a judgment.
 Well, Joe Biden, I think, is one of the finest public servants that has served in this country.
It's not just that he has some of the best foreign policy credentials of anybody.
And Democrats and Republicans alike, I think, acknowledge his expertise there.
 Well, Americans have gotten to know Sarah Palin.
They know that she's a role model to women and other -- and reformers all over America.
She's a reformer.
She is -- she took on a governor who was a member of her own party when she ran for governor.
When she was the head of their energy and natural resources board, she saw corruption, she resigned and said, "This can't go on."
 You know, I think it's -- that's going to be up to the American people.
I think that, obviously, she's a capable politician who has, I think, excited the -- a base in the Republican Party.
 I think that Joe Biden is qualified in many respects.
But I do point out that he's been wrong on many foreign policy and national security issues, which is supposed to be his strength.
 Climate change.
 I think that in ten years, we can reduce our dependence so that we no longer have to import oil from the Middle East or Venezuela.
I think that's about a realistic timeframe.
 Now I just want to make one last point because Senator McCain mentioned NAFTA and the issue of trade and that actually bears on this issue.
I believe in free trade.
But I also believe that for far too long, certainly during the course of the Bush administration with the support of Senator McCain, the attitude has been that any trade agreement is a good trade agreement.
And NAFTA doesn't have -- did not have enforceable labor agreements and environmental agreements.
 Well, you know, I admire so much Senator Obama's eloquence.
And you really have to pay attention to words.
He said, we will look at offshore drilling.
Did you get that?
Look at.
We can offshore drill now.
We've got to do it now.
We will reduce the cost of a barrel of oil because we show the world that we have a supply of our own.
It's doable.
The technology is there and we have to drill now.
 Let me respond.
Actually, I understand it pretty well.
The history in Colombia right now is that labor leaders have been targeted for assassination on a fairly consistent basis and there have not been prosecutions.
 Well, let me just said that that this is -- he -- Senator Obama doesn't want a free trade agreement with our best ally in the region but wants to sit down across the table without precondition to -- with Hugo Chavez, the guy who has been helping FARC, the terrorist organization.
 We've got to do both, and that's exactly what my plan does.
 Well, it is a terribly painful situation for Americans.
They're seeing their premiums, their co-pays go up.
Forty-seven million Americans are without health insurance in America today.
 Now, Senator Obama, I'd like -- still like to know what that fine is going to be, and I don't think that Joe right now wants to pay a fine when he is seeing such difficult times in America's economy.
 It is not and I just described it...
 No, you stated it.
 I just...
 Excuse me.
 I just described what my plan is.
And I'm happy to talk to you, Joe, too, if you're out there.
Here's your fine -- zero.
You won't pay a fine, because...
 Zero?
 Zero, because as I said in our last debate and I'll repeat, John, I exempt small businesses from the requirement for large businesses that can afford to provide health care to their employees, but are not doing it.
 Hey, Joe, you're rich, congratulations, because what Joe wanted to do was buy the business that he's been working for 10-12 hours a day, seven days a week, and you said that you wanted to spread the wealth, but -- in other words, take Joe's money and then you decide what to do with it.
 I want to leave money in your pocket.
I want you to be able to choose the health care for you and your family.
That's what I'm all about.
And we've got too much government and too much spending and the government is -- the size of government has grown by 40 percent in the last eight years.
 Very briefly.
You all just heard my plan.
If you've got an employer-based health care plan, you keep it.
Now, under Senator McCain's plan there is a strong risk that people would lose their employer-based health care.
 I would never and have never in all the years I've been there imposed a litmus test on any nominee to the court.
That's not appropriate to do.
 I thought it was a bad decision.
I think there were a lot of decisions that were bad.
I think that decisions should rest in the hands of the states.
I'm a federalist.
And I believe strongly that we should have nominees to the United States Supreme Court based on their qualifications rather than any litmus test.
Now, let me say that there was a time a few years ago when the United States Senate was about to blow up.
Republicans wanted to have just a majority vote to confirm a judge and the Democrats were blocking in an unprecedented fashion.
 I would consider anyone in their qualifications.
I do not believe that someone who has supported Roe v. Wade that would be part of those qualifications.
But I certainly would not impose any litmus test.
 Well, I think it's true that we shouldn't apply a strict litmus test and the most important thing in any judge is their capacity to provide fairness and justice to the American people.
 So this is going to be an important issue.
I will look for those judges who have an outstanding judicial record, who have the intellect, and who hopefully have a sense of what real-world folks are going through.
 Obviously, that law waived the statute of limitations, which you could have gone back 20 or 30 years.
It was a trial lawyer's dream.
 Yes, let me respond to this.
If it sounds incredible that I would vote to withhold lifesaving treatment from an infant, that's because it's not true.
The -- here are the facts.
 We should try to reduce these circumstances.
 Just again...
 Just again, the example of the eloquence of Senator Obama.
He's health for the mother.
You know, that's been stretched by the pro-abortion movement in America to mean almost anything.
 This probably has more to do with our economic future than anything and that means it also has a national security implication, because there's never been a nation on earth that saw its economy decline and continued to maintain its primacy as a military power.
So we've got to get our education system right.
Now, typically, what's happened is that there's been a debate between more money or reform, and I think we need both.
 Well, it's the civil rights issue of the 21st century.
There's no doubt that we have achieved equal access to schools in America after a long and difficult and terrible struggle.
 We need to encourage programs such as Teach for America and Troops to Teachers where people, after having served in the military, can go right to teaching and not have to take these examinations which -- or have the certification that some are required in some states.
 Well, we have a tradition of local control of the schools and that's a tradition that has served us well.
But I do think that it is important for the federal government to step up and help local school districts do some of the things they need to do.
 Well, sure.
I'm sure you're aware, Senator Obama, of the program in the Washington, D.C., school system where vouchers are provided and there's a certain number, I think it's a thousand and some and some 9,000 parents asked to be eligible for that.
 But to have a situation, as you mentioned in our earlier comments, that the most expensive education in the world is in the United States of America also means that it cries out for reform, as well.
 I'll just make a quick comment about vouchers in D.C.
Senator McCain's absolutely right: The D.C. school system is in terrible shape, and it has been for a very long time.
And we've got a wonderful new superintendent there who's working very hard with the young mayor there to try...
 Who supports vouchers.
 ... who initiated -- actually, supports charters.
 She supports vouchers, also.
 But the -- but here's the thing, is that, even if Senator McCain were to say that vouchers were the way to go -- I disagree with him on this, because the data doesn't show that it actually solves the problem -- the centerpiece of Senator McCain's education policy is to increase the voucher program in D.C. by 2,000 slots.
 Because there's not enough vouchers; therefore, we shouldn't do it, even though it's working.
I got it.
 Well, thank you again, Bob.
 Well, I want to thank Senator McCain and Bob for moderating.
 Thank you, Bob.
And thank you for agreeing to moderate this debate this evening.
Thank you to Lynn University for welcoming us here.
And Mr. President, it's good to be with you again.
We were together at a humorous event a little earlier, and it's nice to maybe funny this time, not on purpose.
We'll see what happens.
 It's certainly not hiding.
This is a group that is now involved in 10 or 12 countries, and it presents an enormous threat to our friends, to the world, to America, long term, and we must have a comprehensive strategy to help reject this kind of extremism.
 Well, my first job as commander in chief, Bob, is to keep the American people safe.
And that's what we've done over the last four years.
 Now that represents the opportunity we have to take advantage of.
And, you know, Governor Romney, I'm glad that you agree that we have been successful in going after Al Qaida, but I have to tell you that, you know, your strategy previously has been one that has been all over the map and is not designed to keep Americans safe or to build on the opportunities that exist in the Middle East.
 Well, my strategy is pretty straightforward, which is to go after the bad guys, to make sure we do our very best to interrupt them, to -- to kill them, to take them out of the picture.
 It's wonderful that Libya seems to be making some progress, despite this terrible tragedy.
 Governor Romney, I'm glad that you recognize that Al Qaida is a threat, because a few months ago when you were asked what's the biggest geopolitical threat facing America, you said Russia, not Al Qaida; you said Russia, in the 1980s, they're now calling to ask for their foreign policy back because, you know, the Cold War's been over for 20 years.
 So, what -- what we need to do with respect to the Middle East is strong, steady leadership, not wrong and reckless leadership that is all over the map.
And unfortunately, that's the kind of opinions that you've offered throughout this campaign, and it is not a recipe for American strength, or keeping America safe over the long haul.
 Well, of course I don't concur with what the president said about my own record and the things that I've said.
They don't happen to be accurate.
But -- but I can say this, that we're talking about the Middle East and how to help the Middle East reject the kind of terrorism we're seeing, and the rising tide of tumult and -- and confusion.
And -- and attacking me is not an agenda.
Attacking me is not talking about how we're going to deal with the challenges that exist in the Middle East, and take advantage of the opportunity there, and stem the tide of this violence.
 Excuse me.
It's a geopolitical foe, and I said in the same -- in the same paragraph I said, and Iran is the greatest national security threat we face.
Russia does continue to battle us in the U.N. time and time again.
I have clear eyes on this.
I'm not going to wear rose-colored glasses when it comes to Russia, or Mr. Putin.
And I'm certainly not going to say to him, I'll give you more flexibility after the election.
After the election, he'll get more backbone.
Number two, with regards to Iraq, you and I agreed I believe that there should be a status of forces agreement.
 Oh you didn't?
You didn't want a status of...
 What I would not have had done was left 10,000 troops in Iraq that would tie us down.
And that certainly would not help us in the Middle East.
 I'm sorry, you actually -- there was a -- there was an effort on the part of the president to have a status of forces agreement, and I concurred in that, and said that we should have some number of troops that stayed on.
That was something I concurred with...
 Governor...
 ...that your posture.
That was my posture as well.
You thought it should have been 5,000 troops...
 Governor?
 ...
I thought there should have been more troops, but you know what?
The answer was we got...
 ... no troops through whatsoever.
 This was just a few weeks ago that you indicated that we should still have troops in Iraq.
 No, I...
 ...I'm sorry that's a...
 You -- you...
 ...that's a -- I indicated...
 ...major speech.
 ...I indicated that you failed to put in place a status...
 Governor?
 ...of forces agreement at the end of the conflict that existed.
 Governor -- here -- here's -- here's one thing...
 ...here's one thing I've learned as commander in chief.
 You've got to be clear, both to our allies and our enemies, about where you stand and what you mean.
You just gave a speech a few weeks ago in which you said we should still have troops in Iraq.
That is not a recipe for making sure that we are taking advantage of the opportunities and meeting the challenges of the Middle East.
 What we've done is organize the international community, saying Assad has to go.
We've mobilized sanctions against that government.
We have made sure that they are isolated.
We have provided humanitarian assistance and we are helping the opposition organize, and we're particularly interested in making sure that we're mobilizing the moderate forces inside of Syria.
 Well, let's step back and talk about what's happening in Syria and how important it is.
First of all, 30,000 people being killed by their government is a humanitarian disaster.
Secondly, Syria is an opportunity for us because Syria plays an important role in the Middle East, particularly right now.
 Syria is Iran's only ally in the Arab world.
It's their route to the sea.
It's the route for them to arm Hezbollah in Lebanon, which threatens, of course, our ally, Israel.
And so seeing Syria remove Assad is a very high priority for us.
Number two, seeing a -- a replacement government being responsible people is critical for us.
And finally, we don't want to have military involvement there.
We don't want to get drawn into a military conflict.
 ...by the leadership role.
 We are playing the leadership role.
We organized the Friends of Syria.
We are mobilizing humanitarian support, and support for the opposition.
And we are making sure that those we help are those who will be friends of ours in the long term and friends of our allies in the region over the long term.
But going back to Libya -- because this is an example of how we make choices.
When we went in to Libya, and we were able to immediately stop the massacre there, because of the unique circumstances and the coalition that we had helped to organize.
We also had to make sure that Moammar Gadhafi didn't stay there.
 I don't want to have our military involved in Syria.
I don't think there is a necessity to put our military in Syria at this stage.
I don't anticipate that in the future.
 And this isn't -- this isn't going to be necessary.
 Well, I'll -- I'll be very quick.
What you just heard Governor Romney said is he doesn't have different ideas.
And that's because we're doing exactly what we should be doing to try to promote a moderate Syrian leadership and a -- an effective transition so that we get Assad out.
That's the kind of leadership we've shown.
That's the kind of leadership we'll continue to show.
 Right.
 No, I don't, because I think that America has to stand with democracy.
The notion that we would have tanks run over those young people who were in Tahrir Square, that is not the kind of American leadership that John F. Kennedy talked about 50 years ago.
 No.
I believe, as the president indicated, and said at the time that I supported his -- his action there.
I felt that -- I wish we'd have had a better vision of the future.
 And, finally, we have to stand by our principles.
And if we're strong in each of those things, American influence will grow.
But unfortunately, in nowhere in the world is America's influence will grow.
But unfortunately, in -- nowhere in the world is America's influence greater today than it was four years ago.
 And that's because we've become weaker in each of those four...
 Well I -- I absolutely believe that America has a -- a responsibility, and the privilege of helping defend freedom and promote the principles that -- that make the world more peaceful.
And those principles include human rights, human dignity, free enterprise, freedom of expression, elections.
Because when there are elections, people tend to vote for peace.
They don't vote for war.
So we want to promote those principles around the world.
We recognize that there are places of conflict in the world.
 America remains the one indispensable nation.
And the world needs a strong America, and it is stronger now than when I came into office.
 I've got a policy for the future and agenda for the future.
And when it comes to our economy here at home, I know what it takes to create 12 million new jobs and rising take-home pay.
And what we've seen over the last four years is something I don't want to see over the next four years.
 Well, let's talk about what we need to compete.
First of all, Governor Romney talks about small businesses.
But, Governor, when you were in Massachusetts, small businesses development ranked about 48th, I think out of 50 states in Massachusetts, because the policies that you are promoting actually don't help small businesses.
 When you were asked about reduced class sizes, you said class sizes don't make a difference.
 Well -- well, I need to speak a moment...
 ... if you'll let me, Bob, just about education...
 ... because I'm -- I'm so proud of the state that I had the chance to be governor of.
 Ten years earlier...
 And that was -- that was -- that was what allowed us to become the number one state in the nation.
 But that was 10 years before you took office.
 And then you cut education spending when you came into office.
 The first -- the first -- the first -- and we kept our schools number one in the nation.
They're still number one today.
 And the principles that we put in place, we also gave kids not just a graduation exam that determined whether they were up to the skills needed to -- to be able compete, but also if they graduated the quarter of their class, they got a four-year tuition- free ride at any Massachusetts public institution of higher learning.
 That happened before you came into office.
 That was actually mine, actually, Mr. President.
You got that fact wrong.
 Well, let's come back and talk about the military, but all the way -- all the way through.
First of all, I'm going through from the very beginning -- we're going to cut about 5 percent of the discretionary budget, excluding military.
That's number one.
 He should have answered the first question.
 Look, Governor Romney's called for $5 trillion of tax cuts that he says he's going to pay for by closing deductions.
Now, the math doesn't work, but he continues to claim that he's going to do it.
He then wants to spend another $2 trillion on military spending that our military is not asking for.
 I'm pleased that I've balanced budgets.
I was on the world of business for 25 years.
If you didn't balance your budget, you went out of business.
I went into the Olympics that was out of balance, and we got it on balance, and made a success there.
I had the chance to be governor of a state.
Four years in a row, Democrats and Republicans came together to balance the budget.
We cut taxes 19 times and balanced our budget.
The president hasn't balanced a budget yet.
I expect to have the opportunity to do so myself.
 I'm going to be able to balance the budget.
 Our Navy is old -- excuse me, our Navy is smaller now than at any time since 1917.
The Navy said they needed 313 ships to carry out their mission.
We're now at under 285.
We're headed down to the low 200s if we go through a sequestration.
That's unacceptable to me.
 Bob, I just need to comment on this.
 And so the question is not a game of Battleship, where we're counting slips.
It's what are our capabilities.
And so when I sit down with the Secretary of the Navy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, we determine how are we going to be best able to meet all of our defense needs in a way that also keeps faith with our troops, that also makes sure that our veterans have the kind of support that they need when they come home.
 And that is not reflected in the kind of budget that you're putting forward because it just doesn't work.
 And, you know, we visited the website quite a bit and it still doesn't work.
 First of all, Israel is a true friend.
It is our greatest ally in the region.
And if Israel is attacked, America will stand with Israel.
I've made that clear throughout my presidency.
And...
 I will stand with Israel if they are attacked.
And this is the reason why, working with Israel, we have created the strongest military and intelligence cooperation between our two countries in history.
 We then organized the strongest coalition and the strongest sanctions against Iran in history, and it is crippling their economy.
Their currency has dropped 80 percent.
Their oil production has plunged to the lowest level since they were fighting a war with Iraq 20 years ago.
So their economy is in a shambles.
 Well, first of all, I want to underscore the same point the president mad,e which is that if I'm President of the United States, when I'm President of the United States, we will stand with Israel.
 It is also essential for us to understand what our mission is in Iran, and that is to dissuade Iran from having a nuclear weapon through peaceful and diplomatic means.
And crippling sanctions are something I called for five years ago, when I was in Israel, speaking at the Herzliya Conference.
I laid out seven steps, crippling sanctions were number one.
And they do work.
You're seeing it right now in the economy.
It's absolutely the right thing to do, to have crippling sanctions.
I would have put them in place earlier.
But it's good that we have them.
 Well, first of all those are reports in the newspaper.
They are not true.
But our goal is to get Iran to recognize it needs to give up its nuclear program and abide by the U.N. resolutions that have been in place.
Because they have the opportunity to reenter the community of nations, and we would welcome that.
 I think from the very beginning, one of the challenges we've had with Iran is that they have looked at this administration, and felt that the administration was not as strong as it needed to be.
 Bob, let me just respond.
 We're four years closer to a nuclear Iran.
We're four years closer to a nuclear Iran.
And -- and -- we should not have wasted these four years to the extent they -- they continue to be able to spin these centrifuges and get that much closer.
That's number one.
 Bob, let me -- let me respond.
 So that's how I've used my travels, when I travel to Israel and when I travel to the region.
And the -- the central question at this point is going to be: Who is going to be credible to all parties involved?
And they can look at my track record, whether it's Iran sanctions, whether it's dealing with counterterrorism, whether it's supporting democracy, whether it's supporting women's rights, whether it's supporting religious minorities.
 Bob, let's not go into hypotheticals of that nature.
Our relationship with Israel, my relationship with the prime minister of Israel is such that we would not get a call saying our bombers are on the way, or their fighters are on the way.
This is the kind of thing that would have been discussed and thoroughly evaluated well before that kind of --
 But let me -- let me come back -- we can come back.
Let's come back to what the president was speaking about, which is what's happening in the world and the president's statement that things are going so well.
 I look around the world, I don't see our influence growing around the world.
I see our influence receding, in part because of the failure of the president to deal with our economic challenges at home; in part because of our withdrawal from our commitment to our military in the way I think it ought to be; in part because of the -- the -- the turmoil with Israel.
 ... the damage in his -- in his own party.
 Governor, the problem is, is that on a whole range of issues, whether it's the Middle East, whether it's Afghanistan, whether it's Iraq, whether it's now Iran, you've been all over the map.
 And you said we should ask Pakistan for permission.
And if we had asked Pakistan permission, we would not have gotten him.
And it was worth moving heaven and earth to get him.
 Bob...
 You can't -- but you can't have the president just lay out a whole series of items without giving me a chance to respond.
 Well, that's probably true.
 Well, we're going to be finished by 2014, and when I'm president, we'll make sure we bring our troops out by the end of 2014.
The commanders and the generals there are on track to do so.
 So for me, I look at this as both a need to help move Pakistan in the right direction, and also to get Afghanistan to be ready, and they will be ready by the end of 2014.
 When I came into office, we were still bogged down in Iraq and Afghanistan had been drifting for a decade.
We ended the war in Iraq, refocused our attention on Afghanistan, and we did deliver a surge of troops.
That was facilitated in part because we had ended the war in Iraq.
 You know, I was having lunch with some -- a veteran in Minnesota who had been a medic dealing with the most extreme circumstances.
When he came home and he wanted to become a nurse, he had to start from scratch.
And what we've said is let's change those certifications.
The first lady has done great work with an organization called Joining Forces putting our veterans back to work.
And as a consequence, veterans' unemployment is actually now lower than general population.
It was higher when I came into office.
 No, it's not time to divorce a nation on Earth that has 100 nuclear weapons and is on the way to double that at some point, a nation that has serious threats from terrorist groups within its nation, as I indicated before, the Taliban, Haqqani Network.
 This is -- this is an important part of the world for us.
Pakistan is -- is technically an ally, and they're not acting very much like an ally right now.
But we have some work to do.
And I -- I don't blame the administration for the fact that the relationship with Pakistan is strained.
We -- we had to go into Pakistan.
We had to go in there to get Osama bin Laden.
That was the right thing to do.
And -- and that upset them, but obviously there was a great deal of anger even before that.
But we're going to have to work with the -- with the people in Pakistan to try and help them move to a more responsible course than the one that they're on.
And it's important for them.
It's important for the nuclear weapons.
 Well I believe we should use any and all means necessary to take out people who pose a threat to us and our friends around the world.
And it's widely reported that drones are being used in drone strikes, and I support that and entirely, and feel the president was right to up the usage of that technology, and believe that we should continue to use it, to continue to go after the people that represent a threat to this nation and to our friends.
But let me also note that as I said earlier, we're going to have to do more than just going after leaders and -- and killing bad guys, important as that is.
 We're also going to have to have a farm more effective and comprehensive strategy to help move the world away from terror and Islamic extremism.
We haven't done that yet.
We talk a lot about these things, but you look at the -- the record, you look at the record.
You look at the record of the last four years and say is Iran closer to a bomb?
Yes.
Is the Middle East in tumult?
Yes.
Is -- is al-Qaida on the run, on its heels?
No.
Is -- are Israel and the Palestinians closer to reaching a peace agreement?
 Well, keep in mind our strategy wasn't just going after bin Laden.
We created partnerships throughout the region to deal with extremism in Somalia, in Yemen, in Pakistan.
 But we're always also going to have to maintain vigilance when it comes to terrorist activities.
The truth, though, is that Al Qaeda is much weaker than it was when I came into office.
And they don't have the same capacities to attack the U.S. homeland and our allies as they did four years ago.
 Well, I think it will continue to be terrorist networks.
We have to remain vigilant, as I just said.
But with respect to China, China is both an adversary, but also a potential partner in the international community if it's following the rules.
So my attitude coming into office was that we are going to insist that China plays by the same rules as everybody else.
 In fact, just recently steelworkers in Ohio and throughout the Midwest -- Pennsylvania -- are in a position now to sell steel to China because we won that case.
We had a tire case in which they were flooding us with cheap domestic tires -- or -- or cheap Chinese tires.
And we put a stop to it and as a consequence saved jobs throughout America.
I have to say that Governor Romney criticized me for being too tough in that tire case; said this wouldn't be good for American workers and that it would be protectionist.
 Well, first of all, it's not government that makes business successful.
It's not government investments that makes businesses grow and hire people.
 They look at our -- our decision to -- to cut back on our military capabilities.
A trillion dollars.
The secretary of defense called these trillion dollars of cuts to our military devastating.
It's not my term, it's the president's own secretary of defense called these trillion dollars of cuts to our military devastating.
It's not my term, it's the president's own Secretary of Defense, called them devastating.
 Well, they sell us about this much stuff every year, and we sell them about this much stuff every year.
So it's pretty clear who doesn't want a trade war.
And there's one going on right now, which we don't know about it.
It's a silent one.
And they're winning.
 Well, Governor Romney's right, you are familiar with jobs being shipped overseas because you invested in companies that were shipping jobs overseas.
 I just want to take one of those points, again, attacking me as not talking about an agenda for -- for getting more trade and opening up more jobs in this country.
But the president mentioned the auto industry and that somehow I would be in favor of jobs being elsewhere.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
 Governor Romney, that's not what you said...
 Governor Romney, you did not...
 You can take a look at the op-ed...
 You did not say that you would provide government help.
 I said that we would provide guarantees, and -- and that was what was able to allow these companies to go through bankruptcy, to come out of bankruptcy.
Under no circumstances would I do anything other than to help this industry get on its feet.
And the idea that has been suggested that I would liquidate the industry, of course not.
Of course not.
 Let's check the record.
 That's the height of silliness...
 Let -- let -- let's...
 I have never said I would liquidate...
 ...I would liquidate the industry.
 Governor, the people in Detroit don't forget.
 ...and -- and that's why I have the kind of commitment to ensure that our industries in this country can compete and be successful.
We in this country can -- can compete successfully with anyone in the world, and we're going to.
We're going to have to have a president, however, that doesn't think that somehow the government investing in -- in car companies like Tesla and -- and Fisker, making electric battery cars.
This is not research, Mr President, these are the government investing in companies.
Investing in Solyndra.
This is a company, this isn't basic research.
I -- I want to invest in research.
Research is great.
Providing funding to universities and think tanks is great.
But investing in companies?
Absolutely not.
 Governor?
 That's the wrong way to go.
 The fact of the matter is...
 I'm still speaking.
So I want to make sure that we make -- we make America more competitive.
 Yeah.
 And that we do those things that make America the most attractive place in the world for entrepreneurs, innovators, businesses to grow.
But you're investing in companies doesn't do that.
In fact it makes it less likely for them to come here...
 Governor?
 ...because the private sector's not going to invest in a...
 I'm -- I'm -- I'm happy.
 ...company...
 ...to respond to you...
 ...if -- if you're...
 ...you've had the floor for a while.
 ...get someone else's.
OBAMA: The -- look, I think anybody out there can check the record.
Governor Romney, you keep on trying to, you know airbrush history here.
You were very clear that you would not provide, government assistance to the U.S. auto companies, even if they went through bankruptcy.
You said that they could get it in the private marketplace.
That wasn't true.
They would have gone through a...
 You're wrong...
 ...they would have gone through a...
 ...you're wrong.
 No, I am not wrong.
I am not wrong.
 People can look it up, you're right.
 People will look it up.
 Good.
 But more importantly it is true that in order for us to be competitive, we're going to have to make some smart choices right now.
 I couldn't agree more about going forward, but I certainly don't want to go back to the policies of the last four years.
The policies of the last four years have seen incomes in America decline every year for middle income families, now down $4,300 during your term.
Twenty-three million Americans still struggling to find a good job.
 But I love teachers.
But I want to get our private sector growing and I know how to do it.
 Well, thank you very much, Bob, Governor Romney, and to Lynn University.
You've now heard three debates, months of campaigning and way too many TV commercials.
And now you've got a choice.
Over the last four years we've made real progress digging our way out of policies that gave us two prolonged wars, record deficits and the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
 Thank you.
 Thank you very much Chris and thanks to UNLV for hosting us.
You know, I think when we talk about the Supreme Court, it really raises the central issue in this election.
Namely, what kind of country are we going to be?
What kind of opportunities will we provide for our citizens?
What kind of rights will Americans have?
And I feel strongly that the Supreme Court needs to stand on the side of the American people.
Not on the side of the powerful corporations and the wealthy.
For me, that means that we need a Supreme Court that will stand up on behalf of women's rights, on behalf of the rights of the LGBT community, that will stand up and say no to Citizens United, a decision that has undermined the election system in our country because of the way it permits dark, unaccountable money to come into our electoral system.
I have major disagreements with my opponent about these issues and others that will be before the Supreme Court.
But I feel that at this point in our country's history, it is important that we not reverse marriage equality, that we not reverse Roe v. Wade, that we stand up against Citizens United, we stand up for the rights of people in the workplace, that we stand up and basically say, the Supreme Court should represent all of us.
That's how I see the court.
And the kind of people that I would be looking to nominate to the court would be in the great tradition of standing up to the powerful, standing up on behalf of our rights as Americans.
And I look forward to having that opportunity.
I would hope that the Senate would do its job and confirm the nominee that President Obama has sent to them.
That's the way the constitution fundamentally should operate.
The President nominates and the Senate advises and consents or not.
But they go forward with the process.
 Well, first of all, its so great to be with you and thank you, everybody.
The Supreme Court, it is what it is all about.
Our country is so, so, it is just so imperative that we have the right justices.
Something happened recently where Justice Ginsburg made some very inappropriate statements toward me and toward a tremendous number of people.
Many, many millions of people that I represent and she was forced to apologize.
And apologize she did.
But these were statements that should never, ever have been made.
We need a Supreme Court that in my opinion is going to uphold the second amendment and all amendments, but the second amendment which is under absolute siege.
I believe, if my opponent should win this race, which I truly don't think will happen, we will have a second amendment which will be a very, very small replica of what it is right now.
But I feel that it is absolutely important that we uphold because of the fact that it is under such trauma.
I feel that the justices that I am going to appoint, and I've named 20 of them.
The justices that I am going to appoint will be pro-life.
They will have a conservative bent.
They will be protecting the second amendment.
They are great scholars in all cases and they're people of tremendous respect.
They will interpret the constitution the way the founders wanted it interpreted and I believe thats very important.
I don't think we should have justices appointed that decide what they want to hear.
It is all about the constitution of, and it is so important.
The constitution the way it was meant to be.
And those are the people that I will appoint.
 Well, first of all, I support the second amendment.
I lived in Arkansas for 18 wonderful years.
I represented upstate New York.
I understand and respect the tradition of gun ownership that goes back to the founding of our country, but I also believe that there can be and must be reasonable regulation.
Because I support the second amendment doesn't mean that I want people who shouldn't have guns to be able to threaten you, kill you or members of your family.
And so when I think about what we need to do, we have 33,000 people a year who die from guns.
I think we need comprehensive background checks, need to close the online loophole, close the gun show loophole.
Theres other matters that I think are sensible, that are the kinds of reforms that would make a difference, that are not in any way conflicting with the second amendment.
You mentioned the Heller decision and what I was saying that you referenced, Chris, was that I disagreed with the way the court applied the second amendment in that case.
Because what the District of Columbia was trying to do was to protect toddlers from guns.
And so they wanted people with guns to safely store them.
And the court did not accept that reasonable regulation but they've accepted many others.
So I see no conflict between saving people's lives and defending the second amendment.
 Well the D.C. versus Heller decision was very strongly... and she was extremely angry about it.
I watched.
I mean, she was very, very angry when upheld.
And Justice Scalia was so involved and it was a well crafted decision.
But Hillary was extremely upset.
Extremely angry.
And people that believe in the second amendment and believe in it very strongly were very upset with what she had to say.
 Well, I was upset because unfortunately, dozens of toddlers injure themselves, even kill people with guns because unfortunately, not everyone who has loaded guns in their homes takes appropriate precautions.
But there is no doubt that I respect the second amendment.
That I also believe there is an individual right to bear arms.
That is not in conflict with sensible, common sense regulation.
And you know, look.
I understand that Donald has been strongly supported by the NRA, the gun lobby is on his side.
They're running millions of dollars of ads against me and I regret that because what I would like to see is for people to come together and say, of course we're going to protect and defend the second amendment.
But we're going to do it in a way that tries to save some of these 33,000 lives that we lose every year.
 Well, let me just tell you before we go any further, in Chicago, which has the toughest gun laws in the United States, probably you could say by far, they have more gun violence than any other city.
So we have the toughest laws and you have tremendous gun violence.
I am a very strong supporter of the second amendment.
And I don't know if Hillary was saying it in a sarcastic manner but I'm very proud to have the endorsement of the NRA and it was the earliest endorsement they've ever given to anybody who ran for president.
So I'm very honored by all of that.
We are going to appoint justices, this is the best way to help the second amendment.
We are going to appoint justices that will feel very strongly about the second amendment.
That will not do damage to the second amendment.
 Well, if that would happen, because I am pro-life and I will be appointing pro-life judges, I would think that would go back to the individual states.
 If they overturned it, it would go back to the states.
 If we put another two or perhaps three justices on, that is really what will happen.
That will happen automatically in my opinion.
Because I am putting pro-life justices on the court.
I will say this.
It will go back to the states and the states will then make a determination.
 Well, I strongly support Roe v. Wade which guarantees a constitutional right to a woman to make the most intimate, most difficult in many cases, decisions about her health care that one can imagine.
And in this case, it is not only about Roe v. Wade.
It is about what is happening right now in America.
So many states are putting very stringent regulations on women that block them from exercising that choice to the extent that they are defunding planned parenthood which, of course provides all kinds of cancer screenings and other benefits for women in our country.
Donald has said he is in favor of defunding planned parenthood.
He even supported shutting the government down to defund planned parenthood.
I will defend planned parenthood.
I will defend Roe v. Wade and I will defend women's rights to make their own healthcare decisions.
We have come too far to have that turn back now.
And indeed, he said women should be punished.
There should be some form of punishment for women who obtain abortions.
And I could just not be more opposed to that kind of thinking.
 Because Roe v. Wade very clearly sets out that there can be regulations on abortion so long as the life and the health of the mother are taken into account.
And when I voted as a senator, I did not think that that was the case.
The kinds of cases that fall at the end of pregnancy are often the most heartbreaking, painful decisions for families to make.
I have met with women who have, toward the end of their pregnancy, get the worst news one could get.
That their health is in jeopardy if they continue to carry to term.
Or that something terrible has happened or just been discovered about the pregnancy.
I do not think the United States government should be stepping in and making those most personal of decisions.
So you can regulate if you are doing so with the life and the health of the mother taken into account.
 Well I think it is terrible.
If you go with what Hillary is saying, in the ninth month you can take baby and rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth of the baby.
Now, you can say that that is okay and Hillary can say that that is okay, but it's not okay with me.
Because based on what she is saying and based on where she's going and where she's been, you can take baby and rip the baby out of the womb.
In the ninth month.
On the final day.
And that's not acceptable.
 Well that is not what happens in these cases.
And using that kind of scare rhetoric is just terribly unfortunate.
You should meet with some of the women I've met with.
Women I've known over the course of my life.
This is one of the worst possible choices that any woman and her family has to make.
And I do not believe the government should be making it.
You know, I've had the great honor of traveling across the world on behalf of our country.
I've been to countries where governments either forced women to have abortions, like they used to do in China, or forced women to bear children like they used to do in Romania.
And I can tell you the government has no business in the decisions that women make with their families in accordance with their faith, with medical advice.
And I will stand up for that right.
 And honestly, nobody has business doing what I just said.
Doing that as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth.
Nobody has that.
 Well first of all, she wants to give amnesty, which is a disaster.
And very unfair to all of the people waiting in line for many, many years.
We need strong borders.
In the audience we have four mothers of - I mean, these are unbelievable people that I've gotten to know over a period of years whose children have been killed, brutally killed, by people that came into the country illegally.
You have thousands of mothers and fathers and relatives all over the country.
 Well, as he was talking, I was thinking about a young girl I met here in Las Vegas, Carla who is very worried that her parents might be deported because she was born in this country but they were not.
They work hard.
They do everything they can to give her a good life.
And you're right.
I don't want to rip families apart.
I don't want to be sending families away from children.
I don't want to see the deportation force that Donald has talked about in action in our country.
We have 11 million undocumented people.
They have 4 million American citizen children.
15 million people.
He said as recently as a few weeks ago in Phoenix, that every undocumented person would be subject to deportation.
Here's with a that means.
It means you would have to have a massive law enforcement presence where law enforcement officers would be going school to school, home to home, business to business.
Rounding up people who are undocumented.
And we would then to have put them on trains, on buses to get them out of our country.
I think that is an idea that is not in keeping with who we are as a nation.
I think it is an idea that would rip our country apart.
I have been for border security for years.
I voted for border security in the United States Senate.
And my comprehensive immigration reform plan, of course includes border security.
But I want to put our resources where I think they're most needed.
Getting rid of any violent person, anybody who should be deported, we should deport them.
When it comes to the wall that Donald talks about building.
He went to Mexico.
Had a meeting with the Mexican president.
He didn't even raise it.
He choked.
And then got into a Twitter war because the Mexican president said we're not paying for that wall.
So I think we are both a nation of immigrants and we are a nation of laws and that we can act accordingly.
And that's why I'm introducing comprehensive immigration reform within the first 100 days with a path to citizenship.
 Chris, I think its -- I think I should respond.
First of all, I had a very good meeting with the President of Mexico.
Very nice man.
We will be doing very much better with Mexico on trade deals.
Believe me.
The NAFTA deal signed by her husband is one of the worst deals ever made of any kind signed by anybody.
Its a disaster.
Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
Hillary Clinton fought for the wall in 2006 or there abouts.
Now, she never gets anything done, so naturally the wall wasn't built.
But Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
 We are a country of laws.
By the way --
 I voted for border security and-
 And a wall.
 -There are some limited places where that was appropriate.
There also is necessarily going to be new technology and how best to deploy that.
But it is clear when you look at what Donald has been proposing.
He started his campaign bashing immigrants, calling Mexican immigrants rapists and criminals and drug dealers, that he has a very different there view about what we should do to deal with immigrants.
Now, what I am also arguing is that bringing undocumented immigrants out from the shadows, putting them into the formal economy would be good.
Because then employers can't exploit them and undercut Americans' wages.
And Donald knows a lot about this.
He used undocumented labor to build the Trump tower.
He underpaid undocumented workers and when they complained, he basically said what a lot of employers do.
You complain, I'll get you deported.
I want to get everybody out of the shadows.
Get the economy working and not let employers like Donald exploit undocumented workers which hurts them but also hurts American workers.
 President Obama has moved millions of people out.
Nobody knows about it.
Nobody talks about it.
But under Obama, millions of people have been moved out of this country.
They've been deported.
She doesn't want to say that, but that's what has happened and thats what happened - big league.
As far as moving these people out and moving, we either have a country or we don't.
We're a country of laws.
We either have a border or we don't.
Now, you can come back in and you can become a citizen.
But its very unfair.
We have millions of people that did it the right way.
They're on line.
They're waiting.
We're going to speed up the process bigly, because its very inefficient.
But they're on line and theyre waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs across the border, becomes a citizen.
Under her plan you have open borders.
You would have a disaster on trade and and you will have a disaster with your open borders.
What she doesnt say is that President Obama has deported millions and millions of people.
 We will not have open borders.
That is a rank mischaracterization.
We will have secure borders.
But we will also have reform.
This used to be a bipartisan issue.
Ronald Reagan was the last president to sign --
 To sign immigration reform and George W. Bush supported it as well.
 Thank you.
 If you went on to read the rest of the sentence, I was talking about energy.
We trade more energy with our neighbors than we trade with the rest of the world combined.
And I do want us to have an electric grid, an energy system that crosses borders.
I think that would be a great benefit to us.
But you are very clearly quoting from WikiLeaks.
What is really important about WikiLeaks is that the Russian government has engaged in espionage against Americans.
They have hacked American websites, American accounts of private people, of institutions.
Then they have given that information to WikiLeaks for the purpose of putting it on the internet.
This has come from the highest levels of the Russian government.
Clearly from Putin himself in an effort, as 17 of our intelligence agencies have confirmed, to influence our election.
So I actually think the most important question of this evening, Chris, is finally, will Donald Trump admit and condemn that the Russians are doing this, and make it clear that he will not have the help of Putin in this election.
That he rejects Russian espionage against Americans, which he actually encouraged in the past.
Those are the questions we need answered.
We've never had anything like this happen in any of our elections before.
 That was a great pivot off the fact that she wants open borders.
Okay?
How did we get on to Putin?
 Just to finish on the borders, she wants open borders.
People are going to pour into our country.
People are going to come in from Syria.
She wants 550% more people than Barack Obama.
And he has thousands and thousands of people.
They have no idea where they come from.
And you see, we are going to stop radical Islamic terrorism in this country.
She won't even mention the words and neither will President Obama.
So I just want to tell you.
She wants open borders.
Now we can talk about Putin.
I don't know Putin.
He said nice things about me.
If we got along well, that would be good.
If Russia and the United States got along well and went after ISIS, that would be good.
He has no respect for her.
He has no respect for our president.
And I'll tell you what.
We're in very serious trouble.
Because we have a country with tremendous numbers of nuclear warheads, 1,800, by the way.
Where they expanded and we didn't.
1,800 nuclear warheads.
And she is playing chicken.
Look.
 Wait.
 Putin from everything I see has no respect for this person.
 Well, that's because he would rather have a puppet as president of the United States.
 No puppet.
You're the puppet.
 It is pretty clear you won't admit that the Russians have engaged in cyber attacks against the United States of America.
That you encouraged espionage against our people.
That you are willing to spout the Putin line, sign up for his wish list, break up NATO, do whatever he wants to do.
And that you continue to get help from him because he has a very clear favorite in this race.
So I think that this is such an unprecedented situation.
We've never had a foreign government trying to interfere in our election.
We have 17, 17 intelligence agencies, civilian and military who have all concluded that these espionage attacks, these cyber attacks, come from the highest levels of the Kremlin.
And they are designed to influence our election.
I find that deeply disturbing.
 And I think it is time --
 She has no idea whether it is Russia, China or anybody else.
 I am not quoting myself.
 You have no idea.
 I am quoting 17, 17 -- do you doubt?
 Our country has no idea.
 Our military and civilian -
 Yeah, I doubt it, I doubt it.
 He would rather believe Vladimir Putin than the military and civilian intelligence professionals who are sworn to protect us.
I find that just absolutely --
 She doesn't like Putin because Putin has outsmarted her at every step of the way.
 Excuse me.
Putin has outsmarted her in Syria, hes outsmarted her every step of the way.
 By Russia or anybody else.
 Of course I condemn, of course I condemn - I don't know Putin.
I have no idea-
 I never met Putin.
This is not my best friend.
But if the United States got along with Russia, it wouldn't be so bad.
Let me tell you, Putin has outsmarted her and Obama at every single step of the way.
Whether it is Syria.
You name it.
Missiles.
Take a look at the start-up that they signed.
The Russians have said, according to many, many reports, I can't believe they allowed us to do this.
They create warheads and we can't.
The Russians can't believe it.
She has been outsmarted by Putin and all you have to do is look at the Middle East.
Theyve taken over.
We've spent $6 trillion.
They've taken over the Middle East.
She has been outsmarted and outplayed worse than anybody I've ever seen in any government whatsoever.
 And she always will be.
 I find it ironic that he is raising nuclear weapons.
This is a person who has been very cavalier, even casual about the use of nuclear weapons.
 Wrong.
 He has advocated more countries getting them.
Japan, Korea, even Saudi Arabia.
Hes said if we have them, why don't we use them which I think is terrifying.
But here's the deal.
The bottom line on nuclear weapons is that when the president gives the order, it must be followed.
There is about four minutes between the order being given and the people responsible for launching nuclear weapons to do so.
And that is why ten people who have had that awesome responsibility have come out and in an unprecedented way said they would not trust Donald Trump with the nuclear codes or to have his finger on the nuclear button.
 I have 200 generals and admirals, 21 endorsing me.
21 congressional medal of honor recipients.
As far as Japan and other countries, we are being ripped off by everybody in the world.
We're defending other countries.
We are spending a fortune doing it.
They have the bargain of the century.
All I said is we have to renegotiate these agreements.
Because our country cannot afford to defend Saudi Arabia, Japan, Germany, South Korea, and many other places.
We cannot continue to afford.
She took that as saying nuclear weapons.
 Look.
She's been proven to be a liar on so many different ways.
This is just another lie.
 Well, I'm just quoting you when-
 There is no quote.
You won't find a quote from me.
 Nuclear competition in Asia.
You said go ahead.
Enjoy yourselves, folks.
 And defend yourselves.
And defend yourselves.
I didn't say -- and defend yourself.
 The United States has kept the peace through our alliances.
Donald wants to tear up our alliances.
I think it makes the world safer and frankly, it makes the United States safer.
I would work with our allies in Asia, in Europe, in the Middle East and elsewhere.
That is the only way --
 Well I think the middle class thrives, America thrives.
So my plan is based on growing the economy, giving middle class families many more opportunities.
I want us to have the biggest jobs program since World War II.
Jobs in infrastructure and advanced manufacturing.
I think we can compete with high wage countries and I believe we should.
New jobs in clean energy.
Not only to fight climate change, which is a serious problem but to create new opportunities and new businesses.
I want us to do more to help small business, thats where two-thirds of the new jobs are going to come from.
I want to us raise the national minimum wage because people who work full time should not still be in poverty.
And I sure do want to make sure women get equal pay for the work we do.
I feel strongly that we have to have an education system that starts with preschool and goes through college.
Thats why I want more technical education and community colleges, real apprenticeships to prepare young peel for the jobs of the future.
I want to make college debt-free and for families making less than $125,000, you will not get a tuition bill from a public college or a university if the plan that I worked on with Bernie Sanders is enacted.
And we're going to work hard to make sure that it is.
Because we are going to go where the money is.
Most of the gains in the last years since the great recession have gone to the very top.
So we are going to have the wealthy pay their fair share.
We're going to have corporations make a contribution greater than they are now to our country.
That is a plan that has been analyzed by independent experts which said that it could produce 10 million new jobs.
By contrast, Donald's plan has been analyzed to conclude it might lose 3.5 million jobs.
Why?
Because his whole plan is to cut taxes.
To give the biggest tax breaks ever to the wealthy and to corporations.
Adding $20 trillion to our debt and causing the kind of dislocation that we have seen before.
Because it truly will be trickle down economics on steroids.
So the plan I have I think will actually produce greater opportunities.
The plan he has will cost us jobs and possibly lead to another great recession.
 Well, first of all, before I start on my plan, her plan is going to raise taxes and even double your taxes.
Her tax plan is a disaster.
And she can say all she wants about college tuition.
And I'm a big proponent.
We're going to do a lot of things for college tuition but the rest the public is going to be paying for it.
We will have a massive, massive tax increase under Hillary Clinton's plan.
But I would like to start off where we left.
Because when I said Japan and Germany and I'm not just singling them out.
But South Korea, these are very rich countries.
Saudi Arabia.
Nothing but money.
We protect Saudi Arabia.
Why aren't they paying?
She immediately, when she heard this, I questioned it, and I questioned NATO, why arent they NATO questioned?
Why aren't they paying?
Because they werent paying.
Since I did this, this was a year ago.
All of a sudden they're paying.
And I've been given a lot of credit for it.
All of a sudden, they're starting to pay up.
They have to pay up.
We're protecting people.
They have to pay up.
And I'm a big fan of NATO but they have to pay up.
She comes out and says we love our allies.
We think our allies are great. Well, it is awfully hard to get them to pay up when you have somebody saying we think how great they are.
We have to tell Japan in a very nice way, we have to tell Germany, all of these countries, South Korea.
We have to say, you have to help us out.
We have, during his regime, during President Obama's regime, we've doubled our national debt.
We're up to $20 trillion.
So my plan, were going to negotiate trade deals.
Were going to have a lot of free trade.
More free trade than we have right now.
But we have horrible deals.
Our jobs are being taken out by the deal that her husband signed.
NAFTA.
One of the worst deals ever.
The jobs are being sucked out of our economy.
You look at the places I just left.
You go to Pennsylvania, you go to Ohio, you go to Florida, you go to any of them.
You go to upstate New York.
Our jobs have fled to Mexico and other places.
We're bringing our jobs back.
I'm going to renegotiate NAFTA.
And if I can't make a great deal, then we're going to terminate NAFTA and were going to create new deals.
We're going to have trade but we're going to terminate it.
We're going on make a great trade deal.
If we can't, we're going to go our separate way because it has been a disaster.
We're going to cut taxes massively.
We're going to cut business taxes massively.
They're going to start hiring people we're going to bring the $2.5 trillion thats offshore back into the country.
We are going to start the engine rolling again because right now, our country is dying.
At 1% GDP.
 Let me translate that if I can, Chris.
 You can't.
 The fact is, he is going to advocate for the largest tax cuts we've ever seen.
Three times more than the tax cuts under the Bush administration.
I have said repeatedly throughout this campaign, I will not raise taxes on anyone making $250,000 or less.
I also will not add a penny to the debt.
I have costed out what Im going to do.
He will, through his massive tax cuts, add $20 trillion to the debt.
He mentioned the debt.
We know how to get control of the debt.
When my husband was president, we went from a $300 billion deficit to a $200 billion surplus and we were actually on the path to eliminating the national debt.
When President Obama came into office, he inherited the worst economic disaster since the great depression.
He has cut the deficit by two-thirds.
So yes, one of the ways you go after the debt, one of the ways you create jobs is by investing in people.
So I do have investments.
Investments in new jobs, investments in education, skill training, and the opportunities for people to get ahead and stay ahead.
That's the kind of approach--
 -- that will work.
Cutting taxes on the wealthy.
We've tried that.
It has not worked the way that it has been --
 Correct.
 Well, it is a combination, Chris.
Let me say that when you inherit the level of economic catastrophe that President Obama inherited, it was a real touch and go situation.
I was in the Senate before I became secretary of state.
I've never seen people as physically distraught as the Bush administration team was because of what was happening to the economy.
I personally believe that the steps that President Obama took saved the economy.
He doesn't get the credit he deserves for taking some very hard positions.
 Over a 10-year period.
 So I just left some high representatives of India.
They're growing at 8%.
China is growing at 7%.
And that for them is a catastrophically low number.
We are growing our last report came out, and it is right around the 1% level.
And I think its going down.
Last week as you know, the end of last week, they came out with an anemic jobs report.
A terrible jobs report.
In fact, I said is that the last jobs report before the election?
Because if it is, I should win easily because it was so bad.
The report was so bad.
Look, our country is stagnant.
We've lost our jobs, we've lost our businesses.
We're not making things anymore, relatively speaking.
Our product is pouring in from China, pouring in from Vietnam, pouring in from all over the world.
I've visited so many communities.
This has been such an incredible education for me, Chris.
I've gotten to know so many, Ive developed so many friends over the last year.
And they cry when they see what has happened.
I pass factories that were thriving, 20, 25 years ago and because of the bill her husband signed and that she blessed 100%.
It is just horrible what has happened to these people in these communities.
Now, she can say her husband did well but boy, did they suffer as NAFTA kicked in because it didn't really kick in very much.
But it kicked in after they left.
Boy, did they suffer.
That was one of the worst things that has ever been signed by our country.
Now she wants to sign Trans-Pacific Partnership.
And she wants it.
She lied when she said she didn't call it the gold standard in one of the debates.
She totally lied.
She did call it the gold standard.
And they actually fact checked and they said I was right.
 And that will be as bad as NAFTA.
 Well, first, let me say, number one, when I saw the final agreement for TPP, I said I was against it.
It didn't meet my test.
I've had the same test.
Does it create jobs, raise incomes and further our national security.
Im against it now.
Ill be against it after the election.
I'll be against it when I'm president.
There's only one of us on this stage who has actually shipped jobs to Mexico because that's Donald.
He has shipped jobs to 12 countries including Mexico.
But he mentioned China.
And, you know, one of the biggest problems we have with China is the illegal dumping of steel and aluminum into our markets.
I have fought against that as a senator.
I have stood up against it as Secretary of State.
Donald has bought Chinese steel and aluminum.
In fact, the Trump Hotel right here in Las Vegas was made with Chinese steel.
So he goes around with crocodile tears about how terrible it is.
But he has given jobs to Chinese steelworkers, not American steelworkers.
That's the kind of approach that is just not going to work.
We're going to pull the country together.
We're going to have trade agreements that we enforce.
That's why I'm going to have a trade prosecutor for the first time in history.
And we're going to enforce those agreements and we're going to look for businesses to help us by buying American products.
 Can I ask a simple question?
She's been doing this for 30 years.
Why the hell didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 years?
You were very much involved.
 I voted --
 Excuse me.
My turn.
You were very much involved in every aspect of this country.
Very much.
And you do have experience.
I say the one thing you have over me is experience.
But it is bad experience because what you've done has turned out badly.
For 30 years you've been in a position to help.
And if you say that I used steel or I used something else, I- make it impossible for me to do.
I wouldn't mind.
The problem is, you talk but you don't get anything done, Hillary.
You don't.
Just like when you ran the State Department, $6 billion was missing.
How do you miss $6 billion?
You ran the State department.
$6 billion was either stolen, they don't know.
Its gone.
$6 billion.
If you become president, this country is going to be in some mess.
Believe me.
 Well, first of all, what he just said about the State Department is not only untrue, its been debunked numerous times.
but I think it's really an important issue.
He raised the 30 years of experience, so let me just talk briefly about that.
You know, back in the 1970s, I worked for the children's defense fund and I was taking on discrimination against African-American kids in schools.
He was getting sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination in his apartment buildings.
In the 1980s, I was working to reform the schools in Arkansas.
He was borrowing $14 million from his father to start his businesses.
In the 1990s, I went to Beijing and I said women's rights are human rights.
He insulted a former Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, and called her an eating machine.
 Give me a break.
 And on the day when I was in the situation room monitoring the raid that brought Osama bin laden to justice, he was hosting The Celebrity Apprentice.
So Im happy to compare my 30 years of experience, what Ive done for this country, trying to help in every way I could, especially kids and families, get ahead and stay ahead, with your thirty years and I'll let the American people make that decision.
 Well I think I did a much better job.
I built a massive company, a great company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world worth many, many billions of dollars.
I started with a $1 million loan.
I agree with that.
It's a $1 million loan, but I built a phenomenal company.
And if we could run our country the way I've run my company, we would have a country that would you would be so proud of, you would even be proud of it.
And frankly, when you look at her real record, take a look at Syria, take a look at the migration, take a look at Libya, take a look at Iraq.
She gave us ISIS because her and Obama created this huge vacuum, and a small group came out of that huge vacuum because, we should have never been in Iraq, but once we were there, we should have never got out the way they wanted to get out.
She gave us ISIS as sure as you are sitting there.
And what happened is now ISIS is in 32 countries.
Now I listen to how she's going to get rid of ISIS.
She's going to get to rid of nobody.
 Well, first of all, those stories have been largely debunked.
Those people, I don't know those people.
I have a feeling how they came.
I believe it was her campaign that did it just like if you look at what came out today on the clips where I was wondering what happened with my rally in Chicago and other rallies where we had such violence.
She's the one and Obama that caused the violence.
They hired people.
They paid them $1500, and they're on tape saying be violent, cause fights, do bad things.
I would say the only way -- because those stories are all totally false.
I have to say that, and I didn't even apologize to my wife who is sitting right here because I didn't do anything.
I didn't know any of these women.
I didn't see these women.
These women, the woman on the plane, the woman on the - I think they want either fame or her campaign did it.
And I think it's her campaign because what I saw what they did, which is a criminal act, by the way, where they're telling people to go out and start fistfights and start violence -- and I'll tell you what.
In particular, in Chicago, people were hurt and people could have killed in that riot.
And that's now all on tape started by her.
I believe, Chris, she got these people to step forward.
If it wasn't, they get their ten minutes of fame, but they were all totally -- it was all fiction.
It was lies and it was fiction.
 Well --
 At the last debate, we heard Donald talking about what he did to women, and after that a number of women have come forward saying that's exactly what he did to them.
Now, what was his response?
Well, he held a number of big rallies where he said that he could not possibly have done those things to those women because they were not attractive enough for 
 I did not say that.
 -- them to be assaulted.
 I did not say that.
 In fact, he went on to say --
 I did not say that.
 He went on to say look at her, I dont think so. About another woman, he said that wouldn't be my first choice. He attacked the woman reporter writing the story, called her disgusting, as he has called a number of women during this campaign.
Donald thinks belittling women makes him bigger.
He goes after their dignity, their self-worth, and I don't think there is a woman anywhere that doesn't know what that feels like.
So we now know what Donald thinks and what he says and how he acts toward women.
That's who Donald is.
I think it's really up to all of us to demonstrate who we are and who our country is and to stand up and be very clear about what we expect from our next president, how we want to bring our country together, where we don't want to have the kind of pitting of people one against the other, where instead we celebrate our diversity, we lift people up, and we make our country even greater.
America is great because America is good.
And it really is up to all of us to make that true now and in the future and particularly for our children and our grandchildren.
 Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
Nobody.
 And frankly, those stories have been largely debunked.
And I really want to just talk about something slightly different.
She mentions this, which is all fiction, all fictionalized, probably or possibly started by her and her very sleazy campaign.
But I will tell you what isn't fictionalized are her e-mails where she destroyed 33,000 e-mails criminally, criminally after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
What happened to the FBI, I don't know.
We have a great general, four-star general, today you read it in all the papers going to potentially serve five years in jail for lying to the FBI, one lie.
She's lied hundreds of times to the people, to Congress, and to the FBI.
He's going to probably go to jail.
This is a four-star general, and she gets away with it and she can run for the presidency of the United States?
That's really what you should be talking about, not fiction where somebody wants fame or where they come out of her crooked campaign.
 Well, every time Donald is pushed on something, which is obviously uncomfortable like what these women are saying, he immediately goes to denying responsibility and it's not just about women.
He never apologizes or says he's sorry for anything, so we know what he has said and what he's done to women.
But he also went after a disabled reporter, mocked and mimicked him on national television.
 Wrong.
 He went after Mr. And Mrs. Khan, the parents of a young man who died serving our country, a gold star family because of their religion.
He went after John McCain, a prisoner of war, said he prefers people that aren't captured.
He went after a federal judge born in Indiana but who Donald said couldn't be trusted to try the fraud and racketeering case against Trump University because his parents were Mexican.
So it's not one thing.
This is a pattern, a pattern of divisiveness, of a very dark and in many ways dangerous vision of our country where he incites violence, where he applauds people who are pushing and pulling and punching at his rallies.
That is not who America is, and I hope that as we move in the last weeks of this campaign more and more people will understand what's at stake in this election.
It really does come down to what kind of country we are going to have.
 So sad when she talks about violence at my rallies and she caused the violence.
It's on tape.
The other things are false, but honestly I'd love to talk about getting rid of ISIS and I'd love to talk about other things.
 But those other charges, as she knows, are false.
 Well, everything I did as secretary of state was in furtherance of our country's interests and our values.
The state department has said that.
I think that's been proven, but I am happy -- in fact, I'm thrilled to talk about the Clinton Foundation because it is a world renowned charity and I'm so proud of the work that it does.
I could talk for the rest of the debate.
I know I don't have the time to do that, but just briefly the Clinton Foundation made it possible for 11 million people around the world with HIV AIDS to afford treatment and that's about half of all the people in the world that are getting treatment in partnership with the American health association.
 Well, it is an open discussion.
 There is a lot of evidence about the very good work --
 And it's a criminal enterprise --
 It's a criminal enterprise.
Saudi Arabia given $25 million, Qatar, all of these countries.
You talk about women and women's rights?
So these are people that push gays off business, off buildings.
These are people that kill women and treat women horribly and yet you take their money.
So I'd like to ask you right now why don't you give back the money that you've taken from certain countries that treat certain groups of people so horribly?
Why dont you give back the money?
I think it would be a great gesture because she takes a tremendous amount of money.
And you take a look at the people of Haiti.
I was in Little Haiti the other day in Florida, and I want to tell you they hate the Clintons because what's happened in Haiti with the Clinton Foundation is a disgrace.
And you know it and they know it and everybody knows it.
 Well, very quickly, we at the Clinton Foundation spend 90%, 90%, of all the money that is donated on behalf of programs for people around the world and in our own country.
Im very proud of that.
We have the highest rating from the watchdogs that follow foundations.
And I would be happy to compare what we do with the Trump Foundation which took money from other people and bought a six-foot portrait of Donald.
I mean, who does that?
I mean, it just was astonishing.
But when it comes to Haiti, Haiti is the poorest country in our hemisphere.
The earthquake and the hurricanes, it has devastated Haiti.
Bill and I have been involved in trying to help Haiti for many years.
The Clinton Foundation raised $30 million to help Haiti after the catastrophic earthquake and all of the terrible problems the people there had.
We've done things to help small businesses, agriculture, and so much else.
And we're going to keep working to help Haiti because it is an important part of the American experience.
 I don't want you to help them anymore.
I'd like to mention one thing.
Trump Foundation, small foundation.
People contribute.
I contribute.
The money goes, 100%, 100% goes to different charities, including a lot of military.
I dont get anything.
I don't buy boats.
I don't buy planes.
 No, we put up the American flag and that's it.
They put up the American flag.
We fought for the right in Palm Beach to put up the American flag.
 There was, there was and by the way, the money went to fisher house where they build houses, the money that you're talking about went to fisher house where they build houses for veterans and disabled veterans.
 Of course, there's no way we can know whether any of that is true because he hasn't released his tax returns.
He's the first candidate ever to run for president in the last 40-plus years who has not released his tax returns.
So everything he says about charity or anything else, we can't prove it.
You can look at our tax returns.
Weve got them all out there.
What is really troubling is that we learned in the last debate he has not paid a penny in federal income tax.
And we were talking about immigrants a few minutes ago, Chris.
Half of all undocumented immigrants actually pay federal income tax.
So we have undocumented immigrants in America who are paying more federal income tax than a billionaire.
I find that just astonishing.
 We're entitled because of the laws that people like her pass to take massive amounts of depreciation on other charges and we do it.
And all of her donors, just about all of them.
I know Buffett took hundreds of millions of dollars.
Soros, George Soros took hundreds of millions of dollars.
 --Let me just explain.
All of her donors.
Most of her donors --
 Have done the same thing as I did.
And you know what she should have done?
You know Hillary, what you should have done?
You should have changed the law when you were a United States senator if you don't like it --
 -- because your donors and special interests are doing the same thing as I do except even more so.
You should have changed the law, but you won't change the law because you take in so much money.
I sat in my apartment today on a very beautiful hotel down the street.
 Made with Chinese steel.
 I will tell you I sat there.
I sat there watching ad after ad after ad, all false ads, all paid for by your friends on Wall Street that gave so much money because they know you're going to protect them.
And frankly, you should have changed the laws.
If you don't like what I did, you should have changed the laws.
 I will look at it at the time.
Im not looking at anything now, I'll look at it at the time.
What I've seen, what Ive seen, is so bad.
First of all, the media is so dishonest and so corrupt and the pile on is so amazing.
"The New York Times" actually wrote an article about it, but they don't even care.
It is so dishonest, and they have poisoned the minds of the voters.
But unfortunately for them, I think the voters are seeing through it.
I think theyre going to see through it, well find out on November 8th, but I think theyre going to see through it.
If you look --
 Excuse me, Chris.
If you look at your voter rolls, you will see millions of people that are registered to vote.
Millions.
This isn't coming from me.
This is coming from Pew report and other places.
Millions of people that are registered to vote that shouldn't be registered to vote.
So let me just give you one other thing.
I talk about the corrupt media.
I talk about the millions of people.
I'll tell you one other thing.
She shouldn't be allowed to run.
Its -- She's guilty of a very, very serious crime.
She should not be allowed to run, and just in that respect I say it's rigged because she should never --
 Chris.
She should never have been allowed to run for the presidency based on what she did with e-mails and so many other things.
 What Im saying is that I will tell you at the time.
I'll keep you in suspense, okay?
 Well Chris, let me respond to that because thats horrifying.
You know, every time Donald thinks things aren't going in his direction, he claims whatever it is, is rigged against him.
The FBI conducted a yearlong investigation into my e-mails.
They concluded there was no case.
He said the FBI was rigged.
He lost the Iowa caucus, he lost the Wisconsin primary, he said the Republican primary was rigged against him.
Then, Trump University gets sued for fraud and racketeering.
He claims the court system and the federal judge is rigged against him.
There was even a time when he didn't get an Emmy for his TV program three years in a row and he started tweeting that the Emmys were rigged against him.
 Should have gotten it.
 This is a mind-set.
This is how Donald thinks, and it's funny, but it's also really troubling.
That is not the way our democracy works.
We've been around for 240 years.
We've had free and fair elections.
We've accepted the outcomes when we may not have liked them, and that is what must be expected of anyone standing on a debate stage during a general election.
You know, President Obama said the other day when you're whining before the game is even finished--
-- It just shows you're not up to doing the job.
And let's be clear about what he's saying and what that means.
He's denigrating, he is talking down our democracy.
And I, for one, am appalled that somebody who is the nominee of one of our two major parties would take that kind of position.
 I think what the FBI did and what the Department of Justice did, including meeting with her husband, the Attorney General, in the back of an airplane on the tarmac in Arizona, I think it's disgraceful.
I think it's a disgrace.
 I think we've never had a situation so bad
 Well, I am encouraged there is an effort led by the Iraqi Army, supported by Kurdish forces and also given the help and advice from the number of special forces and other Americans on the ground, but I will not support putting American soldiers into Iraq as an occupying force.
I don't think that is in our interest, and I don't think that would be smart to do.
In fact, Chris, I think that would be a big red flag waving for ISIS to reconstitute itself.
The goal here is to take back Mosul.
It's going to be a hard fight.
I've got no illusions about that.
And then continue to press into Syria to begin to take back and move on Raqqa, which is the ISIS headquarters.
I am hopeful that the hard work that American military advisers have done will pay off and that we will see a really successful military operation.
But we know we've got lots of work to do.
Syria will remain a hotbed of terrorism as long as the civil war aided and abetted by the Iranians and the Russians continue, so I have said, look, we need to keep our eye on ISIS.
That's why I want to have an intelligence surge that protects us here at home, why we have to go after them from the air, on the ground, online, why we have to make sure here at home we don't let terrorists buy weapons.
If you're too dangerous to fly, you're too dangerous to buy a gun.
And I'm going to continue to push for a no-fly zone and safe havens within Syria, not only to help protect the Syrians and prevent the constant outflow of refugees, but to frankly gain some leverage on both the Syrian government and the Russians so that perhaps we can have the kind of serious negotiation necessary to bring the conflict to an end and go forward on a political track.
 Let me tell you, Mosul is so sad.
We had Mosul.
But when she left, she took everybody out, we lost Mosul.
Now we're fighting again to get Mosul.
The problem with Mosul and what they wanted to do is they wanted to get the leaders of ISIS who they felt were in Mosul.
About three months ago, I started reading they want to get the leaders and they're going to attack Mosul.
Whatever happened to the element of surprise, okay?
We announce we're going after Mosul.
I've been reading about going after Mosul now for about how long is it, Hillary, three months?
These people have all left.
They've all left.
The element of surprise.
Douglas MacArthur, George Patton spinning in their graves at the stupidity of our country.
 Well, you know, once again Donald is implying that he didn't support the invasion of Iraq.
I said it was a mistake.
I said that years ago.
He has consistently denied what is --
 Wrong.
 -- is a very clear fact that before the invasion
 Wrong.
 -- he supported it.
I just want everybody to go google it.
Google Donald Trump Iraq and you'll see the dozens of sources which verify that he was for the invasion of Iraq.
 Wrong.
 And you can hear the audio of him saying that.
Why does that matter?
Well, it matters because he has not told the truth about that position.
I guess he believes it makes him look better to contrast with me because I did vote for it.
But what's really important here is to understand all the interplay.
Mosul is a Sunni city.
Mosul is on the border of Syria, and yes, we do need to go after Baghdadi, just like we went after Bin Laden while you were doing "Celebrity apprentice" and we brought him to justice.
We need to go after the leadership, but we need to get rid of them, get rid of their fighters.
There are several thousand fighters in Mosul.
Theyve been digging underground.
Theyve been prepared to defend.
It's going to be tough fighting, but I think we can take back Mosul and then we can move on into Syria and take back Raqqa.
 We don't gain anything.
Iran is taking over --
 Iran is taking over Iraq.
 --his conspiracy theories-
 We would have gained --
 For quite sometime --
 Hes unfit.
He proves it every time.
 No, you're the one that's unfit.
You know, Wikileaks just actually came out.
John Podesta said some horrible things about you, and boy was he right.
He said some beauties.
And you know Bernie Sanders, he said you have bad judgment.
You do.
And if you think going into Mosul after we let the world know we're going in and all of the people we really wanted, the leaders are all gone, if you think that was good, then you do.
Now John Podesta said you have terrible instincts.
Bernie Sanders said you have bad judgment.
I agree with both.
 Well you should ask Bernie Sanders who he is supporting for President.
 Which is a big mistake
 And he said you are the most dangerous person to run for president in the modern history of America.
I think he's right.
 It's a catastrophe.
 Its a mess.
Have you seen it?
Have you seen it?
Have you seen whats happened to Aleppo?
 Okay, so it hasnt fallen.Take a look at it.
 Thats right.
And they are being slaughtered because of bad decisions.
 Well Aleppo is a disaster.
Its a humanitarian nightmare, but it has fallen from any standpoint.
What do you need, a signed document?
Take a look at Aleppo.
It is so sad when you see what's happened.
And a lot of this is because of Hillary Clinton.
Because what's happened is by fighting Assad, who turned out to be a lot tougher than she thought -- now she's going to say oh he loves Assad.
He's much tougher and much smarter than her and Obama.
And everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago.
He aligned with Russia.
He now also aligned with Iran, who we made very powerful.
We gave them $150 billion back.
We gave them $1.7 billion in cash.
I mean, cash, bundles of cash as big as this stage.
We gave them $1.7 billion.
 Well Chris, first of all, I think a no-fly zone could save lives and hasten the end of the conflict.
I am well aware of the really legitimate concerns you have expressed from both the president and the general.
This would not be done just on the first day.This would take a lot of negotiation and it would also take making it clear to the Russians and the Syrians that our purpose is to provide safe zones on the ground.
We've had millions of people leave Syria, and those millions of people inside Syria whove been dislocated.
So I think we could strike a deal and make it very clear to the Russians and Syrians that this was something that we believe the best interests of the people on the ground in Syria.
It would help us in the fight against ISIS.
 But I just have too... Its so ridiculous what she she will defeat ISIS.
We should never have let ISIS happen in the first place.
And right now they are in 32 countries --
 Wait one second.
They had a cease-fire three weeks ago.
A ceasefire: United States, Russia, Syria.
And during the cease-fire, Russia took over vast swathes of land and then they said we don't want the cease-fire anymore.
We are so outplayed on missiles, on ceasefires.
They are outplayed.
She wasn't there.
I assume she had nothing to do with it, but our country is so outplayed by Putin and Assad and, by the way, and by Iran.
Nobody can believe how stupid our leadership is.
 Well I saw they're wrong because Im going to create tremendous jobs.
And we're bringing GDP from really 1%, which is what it is now, and if she got in, it would be less than zero, but were bringing it from 1% up to 4%, and I actually think we can go higher than 4%.
I think you can go to 5% or 6%.
And if we do, you dont have to bother asking your question.
Because we have a tremendous machine.
We will have created a tremendous economic machine once again.
To do that, we're taking back jobs.
We're not going to let our companies be raided by other countries where we lose all our jobs.
We don't make our product anymore.
It's very sad, but I am going to create a the kind of a country that we were from the standpoint of industry.
We used to be there.
We've given it up.
We've become very, very sloppy.
We've had people that are political hacks making the biggest deals in the world.
Bigger than companies.
You take these big companies.
 Well, first when I hear Donald talk like that and know that his slogan is "Make America Great Again."
I wonder when he thought America was great.
And before he rushes and says, you know, before you and President Obama were there, I think it's important to recognize that he has been criticizing our government for decades.
You know, back in 1987, he took out an $100,000 ad in the New York Times during the time when President Reagan was president and basically said exactly what he just said right now.
That we were the laughing stock of the world.
He was criticizing President Reagan.
This is the way Donald thinks about himself, puts himself into, you know, the middle and says, you know, I alone can fix it, as he said on the convention stage.
 We've heard this before, Hillary.
We've heard this before.
 I think it's a difference that affects how we see the world and what we want to do with the economy.
 Thank you, Hillary.
Could I just respond?
 Because I disagreed with Ronald Reagan very strongly on trade.
I disagreed with him.
We should have been much tougher on trade even then.
I've been waiting for years.
Nobody does it right.
And frankly now we're going to do it right.
 I'm cutting taxes.
We're going to grow the economy.
It's going to grow in a record rate.
 It is going to totally help you.
And one thing we have to do is repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
It's destroying our country.
It's destroying our businesses, our small business and our big businesses.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare.
You take a look at the kind of numbers that that will cost us in the year [2017].
It is a disaster if we don't repeal and replace.
It is probably going to die of its own weight, but Obamacare has to go.
The premiums are going up 60%, 70%, 80%.
Next year, they're going to go up over 100%.
And Im really glad that the premiums have started, at least the people see what's happening because she wants to keep Obamacare and she wants to make it even worse and it can't get any worse.
Bad health care at the most expensive price.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare.
 Well, Chris, I am record as saying we need to put more money into Social Security Trust fund.
That's part of my commitment to raise taxes on the wealthy.
My Social Security payroll contribution will go up as will Donald's assuming he can't figure out how to get out of it, but what we want to do is --
 Such a nasty woman.
 Replenish the trust fund by making sure that we have sufficient resources, and that will come from either raising the cap and/or finding other ways to get more money into it.
I will not cut benefits.
I want to enhance benefits for low-income workers and for women who have been disadvantaged by the current Social Security system.
But what Donald is proposing with these massive tax cuts will result in a $20 trillion additional national debt.
That will have dire consequences for Social Security and Medicare.
And I'll say something about the Affordable Care Act, which he wants to repeal.
The affordable care act extended the solvency of the medicare trust fund.
If he repeals it, our Medicare problem gets worse.
 Your husband disagrees with you.
 Weve got to go after the long-term health care drivers.
We've got to get costs down, increase value, emphasize wellness.
I have a plan for doing that, and I think that we will be able to get entitlement spending under control but with more resources and smart decisions.
 Well I would like to say to everyone watching tonight that I'm reaching out to all Americans, Democrats, Republicans and independents, because we need everybody to help make our country what it should be, to grow the economy, to make it fairer, to make it work for everyone.
We need your talents, your skills, your commitment, your energy, your ambition.
You know, I've been privileged to see the presidency up close, and I know the awesome responsibility of protecting our country and the incredible opportunity of working to try to make life better for all of you.
I have made the cause of children and families really my life's work.
That's what my mission will be in the presidency.
I will stand up for families against powerful interests, against corporations.
I will do everything that I can to make sure that you have good jobs with rising incomes, that your kids have good educations from preschool through college.
I hope you will give me a chance to serve as your president.
 She's raising the money from the people she wants to control.
Doesn't work that way.
But when I started this campaign, I started it very strongly.
It's called Make America Great Again.
We're going to make America great.
We have a depleted military.
It has to be helped.
It has to be fixed.
We have the greatest people on Earth in our military.
We don't take care of our veterans.
We take care of illegal immigrants, people that come into our country illegally better than we take care of our vets.
That cant happen.
Our policemen and women are disrespected.
We need law and order, but we need justice too.
Our inner cities are a disaster.
You get shot walking to the store.
They have no education.
They have no jobs.
I will do more for African-Americans and Latinos that she can do for ten lifetimes.
All she's done is talk to the African-Americans and to the Latinos, but they get the vote and then they come back, they say well see you in four years. We are going to make America strong again and we are going to make America great again and it has to start now.
We cannot take four more years of Barack Obama, and that's what you get when you get her.
 Good evening, Mr. Howe.
 Good evening, Mr. Howe.
 Mr. Howe, Senator Kennedy, my fellow Americans.
Since this campaign began I have had a very rare privilege.
I have traveled to forty-eight of the fifty states and in my travels I have learned what the people of the United States are thinking about.
There is one issue that stands out above all the rest, one in which every American is concerned, regardless of what group he may be a member and regardless of where he may live.
And that issue, very simply stated, is this: how can we keep the peace - keep it without surrender?
How can we extend freedom - extend it without war?
Now in determining how we deal with this issue, we must find the answer to a very important but simple question: who threatens the peace?
Who threatens freedom in the world?
There is only one threat to peace and one threat to freedom - that that is presented by the international Communist movement.
And therefore if we are to have peace, we must know how to deal with the Communists and their leaders.
I know Mr. Khrushchev.
I also have had the opportunity of knowing and meeting other Communist leaders in the world.
I believe there are certain principles we must find in dealing with him and his colleagues - principles, if followed, that will keep the peace and that also can extend freedom.
First, we have to learn from the past, because we cannot afford to make the mistakes of the past.
In the seven years before this Administration came into power in Washington, we found that six hundred million people went behind the Iron Curtain.
And at the end of that seven years we were engaged in a war in Korea which cost of thirty thousand American lives.
In the past seven years, in President Eisenhower's Administration, this situation has been reversed.
We ended the Korean War; by strong, firm leadership we have kept out of other wars; and we have avoided surrender of principle or territory at the conference table.
Now why were we successful, as our predecessors were not successful?
I think there're several reasons.
In the first place, they made a fatal error in misjudging the Communists; in trying to apply to them the same rules of conduct that you would apply to the leaders of the free world.
One of the major errors they made was the one that led to the Korean War.
In ruling out the defense of Korea, they invited aggression in that area.
They thought they were going to have peace - it brought war.
We learned from their mistakes.
And so, in our seven years, we find that we have been firm in our diplomacy; we have never made concessions without getting concessions in return.
We have always been willing to go the extra mile to negotiate for disarmament or in any other area.
But we have never been willing to do anything that, in effect, surrendered freedom any place in the world.
That is why President Eisenhower was correct in not apologizing or expressing regrets to Mr. Khrushchev at the Paris Conference, as Senator Kennedy suggested he could have done.
That is why Senator wh- President Eisenhower was also correct in his policy in the Formosa Straits, where he declined, and refused to follow the recommendations - recommendations which Senator Kennedy voted for in 1955; again made in 1959; again repeated in his debates that you have heard - recommendations with regard to - again - slicing off a piece of free territory, and abandoning it, if - in effect, to the Communists.
Why did the President feel this was wrong and why was the President right and his critics wrong?
Because again this showed a lack of understanding of dictators, a lack of understanding particularly of Communists, because every time you make such a concession it does not lead to peace; it only encourages them to blackmail you.
It encourages them to begin a war.
And so I say that the record shows that we know how to keep the peace, to keep it without surrender.
Let us move now to the future.
It is not enough to stand on this record because we are dealing with the most ruthless, fanatical... leaders that the world has ever seen.
That is why I say that in this period of the sixties, America must move forward in every area.
First of all, although we are today, as Senator Kennedy has admitted, the strongest nation in the world militarily, we must increase our strength, increase it so that we will always have enough strength that regardless of what our potential opponents have - if the should launch a surprise attack - we will be able to destroy their war-making capability.
They must know, in other words, that it is national suicide if they begin anything.
We need this kind of strength because we're the guardians of the peace.
In addition to military strength, we need to see that the economy of this country continues to grow.
It has grown in the past seven years.
It can and will grow even more in the next four.
And the reason that it must grow even more is because we have things to do at home and also because we're in a race for survival - a race in which it isn't enough to be ahead; it isn't enough simply to be complacent.
We have to move ahead in order to stay ahead.
And that is why, in this field, I have made recommendations which I am confident will move the American economy ahead - move it firmly and soundly so that there will never be a time when the Soviet Union will be able to challenge our superiority in this field.
And so we need military strength, we need economic strength, we also need the right diplomatic policies.
What are they?
Again we turn to the past.
Firmness but no belligerence, and by no belligerence I mean that we do not answer insult by insult.
When you are proud and confident of your strength, you do not get down to the level of Mr. Khrushchev and his colleagues.
And that example that President Eisenhower has set we will continue to follow.
But all this by itself is not enough.
It is not enough for us simply to be the strongest nation militarily, the strongest economically, and also to have firm diplomacy.
We must have a great goal.
And that is: not just to keep freedom for ourselves but to extend it to all the world, to extend it to all the world because that is America's destiny.
To extend it to all the world because the Communist aim is not to hold their own but to extend Communism.
And you cannot fight a victory for Communism or a strategy of victory for Communism with the strategy, simply of holding the line.
And so I say that we believe that our policies of military strength, of economic strength, of diplomatic firmness first will keep the peace and keep it without surrender.
We also believe that in the great field of ideals that we can lead America to the victory for freedom - victory in the newly developing countries, victory also in the captive countries - provided we have faith in ourselves and faith in our principles.
 Mr. Howe, Mr. Vice President.
First uh - let me again try to correct the record on the matter of Quemoy and Matsu.
I voted for the Formosa resolution in 1955.
I have sustained it since then.
I've said that I agree with the Administration policy.
Mr. Nixon earlier indicated that he would defend Quemoy and Matsu even if the attack on these islands, two miles off the coast of China, were not part of a general attack an Formosa and the Pescadores.
I indicated that I would defend those islands if the attack were directed against Pescadores and Formosa, which is part of the Eisenhower policy.
I've supported that policy.
In the last week, as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, I have re-read the testimony of General Twining representing the Administration in 1959, and the Assistant Secretary of State before the Foreign Relations Committee in 1958, and I have accurately described the Administration policy, and I support it wholeheartedly.
So that really isn't an issue in this campaign.
It isn't an issue with Mr. Nixon, who now says that he also supports the Eisenhower policy.
Nor is the question that all Americans want peace and security an issue in this campaign.
The question is: are we moving in the direction of peace and security?
Is our relative strength growing?
Is, as Mr. Nixon says, our prestige at an all-time high, as he said a week ago, and that of the Communists at an all-time low?
I don't believe it is.
I don't believe that our relative strength is increasing.
And I say that not as the Democratic standard-bearer, but as a citizen of the United States who is concerned about the United States.
I look at Cuba, ninety miles off the coast of the United States.
In 1957 I was in Havana.
I talked to the American Ambassador there.
He said that he was the second most powerful man in Cuba.
And yet even though Ambassador Smith and Ambassador Gardner, both Republican Ambassadors, both warned of Castro, the Marxist influences around Castro, the Communist influences around Castro, both of them have testified in the last six weeks, that in spite of their warnings to the American government, nothing was done.
Our d- security depends upon Latin America.
Can any American looking at the situation in Latin America feel contented with what's happening today, when a candidate for the presidency of Brazil feels it necessary to call - not on Washington during the campaign - but on Castro in Havana, in order to pick up the support of the Castro supporters in Brazil?
At the American Conference - Inter-American Conference this summer, when we wanted them to join together in the denunciation of Castro and the Cuban Communists, we couldn't even get the Inter-American group to join together in denouncing Castro.
It was rather a vague statement that they finally made.
Do you know today that the Com- the Russians broadcast ten times as many programs in Spanish to Latin America as we do?
Do you know we don't have a single program sponsored by our government to Cuba - to tell them our story, to tell them that we are their friends, that we want them to be free again?
Africa is now the emerging area of the world.
It contains twenty-five percent of all the members of the General Assembly.
We didn't even have a Bureau of African Affairs until 1957.
In the Africa south of the Sahara, which is the major new section, we have less students from all of Africa in that area studying under government auspices today than from the country of Thailand.
If there's one thing Africa needs it's technical assistance.
And yet last year we gave them less than five percent of all the technical assistance funds that we distributed around the world.
We relied in the Middle East on the Baghdad Pact, and yet when the Iraqi Government was changed, the Baghdad Pact broke down.
We relied on the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East, which passed the Senate.
There isn't one country in the Middle East that now endorses the Eisenhower Doctrine.
We look to Europe uh - to Asia because the struggle is in the underdeveloped world.
Which system, Communism or freedom, will triumph in the next five or ten years?
That's what should concern us, not the history of ten, or fifteen, or twenty years ago.
But are we doing enough in these areas?
What are freedom's chances in those areas?
By 1965 or 1970, will there be other Cubas in Latin America?
Will Guinea and Ghana, which have now voted with the Communists frequently as newly independent countries of Africa - will there be others?
Will the Congo go Communist?
Will other countries?
Are we doing enough in that area?
And what about Asia?
Is India going to win the economic struggle or is China going to win it?
Who will dominate Asia in the next five or ten years?
Communism?
The Chinese?
Or will freedom?
The question which we have to decide as Americans - are we doing enough today?
Is our strength and prestige rising?
Do people want to be identified with us?
Do they want to follow United States leadership?
I don't think they do, enough.
And that's what concerns me.
In Africa - these countries that have newly joined the United Nations.
On the question of admission of Red China, only two countries in all of Africa voted with us - Liberia and the Union of South Africa.
The rest either abstained or voted against us.
More countries in Asia voted against us on that question than voted with us.
I believe that this struggle is going to go on, and it may be well decided in the next decade.
I have seen Cuba go to the Communists.
I have seen Communist influence and Castro influence rise in Latin America.
I have seen us ignore Africa.
There are six countries in Africa that are members of the United Nations.
There isn't a single American diplomatic representative in any of those six.
When Guinea became independent, the Soviet Ambassador showed up that very day.
We didn't recognize them for two months; the American Ambassador didn't show up for nearly eight months.
I believe that the world is changing fast.
And I don't think this Administration has shown the foresight, has shown the knowledge, has been identified with the great fight which these people are waging to be free, to get a better standard of living, to live better.
The average income in some of those countries is twenty-five dollars a year.
The Communists say, "Come with us; look what we've done."
And we've been in - on the whole, uninterested.
I think we're going to have to do better.
Mr. Nixon talks about our being the strongest country in the world.
I think we are today.
But we were far stronger relative to the Communists five years ago, and what is of great concern is that the balance of power is in danger of moving with them.
They made a breakthrough in missiles, and by nineteen sixty-one, two, and three, they will be outnumbering us in missiles.
I'm not as confident as he is that we will be the strongest military power by 1963.
He talks about economic growth as a great indicator of freedom.
I agree with him.
What we do in this country, the kind of society that we build, that will tell whether freedom will be sustained around the world.
And yet, in the last nine months of this year, we've had a drop in our economic growth rather than a gain.
We've had the lowest rate of increase of economic growth in the last nine months of any major industrialized society in the world.
I look up and see the Soviet flag on the moon.
The fact is that the State Department polls on our prestige and influence around the world have shown such a sharp drop that up till now the State Department has been unwilling to release them.
And yet they were polled by the U.S.I.A.
The point of all this is, this is a struggle in which we're engaged.
We want peace.
We want freedom.
We want security.
We want to be stronger.
We want freedom to gain.
But I don't believe in these changing and revolutionary times this Administration has known that the world is changing - has identified itself with that change.
I think the Communists have been moving with vigor - Laos, Africa, Cuba - all around the world today they're on the move.
I think we have to revita1ize our society.
I think we have to demonstrate to the people of the world that we're determined in this free country of ours to be first - not first if, and not first but, and not first when - but first.
And when we are strong and when we are first, then freedom gains; then the prospects for peace increase; then the prospects for our society gain.
 Our policies are very different.
I think that Senator Kennedy's policies and recommendations for the handling of the Castro regime are probably the most dangers- dangerously irresponsible recommendations that he's made during the course of this campaign.
In effect, what Senator Kennedy recommends is that the United States government should give help to the exiles and to those within Cuba who oppose the Castro regime - provided they are anti-Batista.
Now let's just see what this means.
We have five treaties with Latin America, including the one setting up the Organization of American States in Bogota in 1948, in which we have agreed not to intervene in the internal affairs of any other American country - and they as well have agreed to do likewise.
The charter of the United Nations - its Preamble, Article I and Article II - also provide that there shall be no intervention by one nation in the internal affairs of another.
Now I don't know what Senator Kennedy suggests when he says that we should help those who oppose the Castro regime, both in Cuba and without.
But I do know this: that if we were to follow that recommendation, that we would lose all of our friends in Latin America, we would probably be condemned in the United Nations, and we would not accomplish our objective.
I know something else.
It would be an open invitation for Mr. Khrushchev to come in, to come into Latin America and to engage us in what would be a civil war, and possibly even worse than that.
This is the major recommendation that he's made.
Now, what can we do?
Well, we can do what we did with Guatemala.
There was a Communist dictator that we inherited from the previous Administration.
We quarantined Mr. Arbenz.
The result was that the Guatemalan people themselves eventually rose up and they threw him out.
We are quarantining Mr. Castro today.
We're quarantining him diplomatically by bringing back our Ambassador; economically by cutting off trade, and Senator Kennedy's suggestion that the trade that we cut off is not significant is just one hundred percent wrong.
We are cutting off the significant items that the Cuban regime needs in order to survive.
By cutting off trade, by cutting off our diplomatic relations as we have, we will quarantine this regime so that the people of Cuba themselves will take care of Mr. Castro.
But for us to do what Senator Kennedy has suggested would bring results which I know he would not want, and certainly which the American people would not want.
 Mr. Nixon uh - shows himself i- misinformed.
He surely must be aware that most of the equipment and arms and resources for Castro came from the United States, flowed out of Florida and other parts of the United States to Castro in the mountains.
There isn't any doubt about that, number one.
Number two, I believe that if any economic sanctions against Latin America are going to be successful they have to be multilateral.
They have to include the other countries of Latin America.
The very minute effect of the action which has been taken this week on Cuba's economy - I believe Castro can replace those markets very easily through Latin America, through Europe, and through Eastern Europe.
If the United States had stronger prestige and influence in Latin America it could persuade - as Franklin Roosevelt did in 1940 - the countries of Latin America to join in an economic quarantine of Castro.
That's the only way you can bring real economic pressure on the Castro regime - and also the countries of Western Europe, Canada, Japan and the others.
Number three, Castro is only the beginning of our difficulties throughout Latin America.
The big struggle will be to prevent the influence of Castro spreading to other countries - Mexico, Panama, Bolivia, Colombia.
We're going to have to try to provide closer ties, to associate ourselves with the great desire of these people for a better life if we're going to prevent Castro's influence from spreading throughout all of Latin America.
His influence is strong enough today to prevent us from joi- getting the other countries of Latin America to join with us in economic quarantine.
His influence is growing - mostly because this Administration has ignored Latin America.
You yourself said, Mr. Vice President, a month ago, that if we had provided the kind of economic aid five years ago that we are now providing we might never have had Castro.
Why didn't we?
 Mr. Edwards, I don't think it's a wise idea for presidential candidates to appoint the members of his cabinet prospectively, or to suggest four people - indicate that one of them surely will be appointed.
This is a decision that the president of the United States must make.
The last candidate who indicated that he knew who his cabinet was going to be was Mr. Dewey in 1948.
This is a race between the Vice President and myself for the presidency of the United States.
There are a good many able men who could be secretary of state.
I've made no judgment about who should be secretary of state.
I think that judgment could be made after election, if I'm successful.
The people have to make a choice between Mr. Nixon and myself, between the Republican party and the Democratic party, between our approach to the problems which now disturb us as a nation and disturb us as a world power.
The president bears the constitutional responsibility, not the secretary of state, for the conduct of foreign affairs.
Some presidents have been strong in foreign policy; others have relied heavily on the secretary of state.
I've been a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee; I run for the presidency with full knowledge that his great responsibility, really, given to him by the Constitution and by the force of events, is in the field of foreign affairs.
I'm asking the people's support as president.
We will select the best man we can get.
But I've not made a judgment, and I have not narrowed down a list of three or four people, among whom would be the candidate.
 Well Mr. Edwards, as you probably know, I have consistently answered all questions with regard to who will be in the next cabinet by saying that that is the responsibility of the next president, and it would be inappropriate to make any decisions on that or to announce any prior to the time that I had the right to do so.
So that is my answer to this question.
If you don't mind, I'd like to use the balance of the time to respond to one of the comments that Senator Kennedy made on the previous question.
Eh- He was talking about the Castro regime and what we had been eh- doing in Latin America.
I would like to point out that when we look at our programs in Latin America, we find that we have appropriated five times as much for Latin America as was appropriated by the previous Administration; we find that we have two billion dollars more for the Export-Import Bank; we have a new bank for Latin America alone of a billion dollars; we have the new program which was submitted at the Bogota Conference - this new program that President Eisenhower submitted, approved by the last Congress - for five hundred million dollars.
We have moved in Latin America very effectively, and I'd also like to point this out: Senator Kennedy complains very appropriately about our inadequate ra- radio broadcasts for Latin America.
Let me point out again that his Congress - the Democratic Congress - has cut eighty million dollars off of the Voice of America appropriations.
Now, he has to get a better job out of his Congress if he's going to get us the money that we need to conduct the foreign affairs of this country in Latin America or any place else.
 Mr. Cronkite, I naturally am aware of it, because I, of course, pay attention to everything Senator Kennedy says, as well as Senator Fulbright.
Now, in this connection I want to point out that the facts simply aren't as stated.
First of all, the report to which Senator Kennedy refers is one that was made many, many months ago and related particularly to the uh - period immediately after Sputnik.
Second, as far as this report is concerned, I would have no objection to having it made public.
Third, I would say this with regard to this report, with regard to Gallup Polls of prestige abroad and everything else that we've been hearing about "what about American prestige abroad": America's prestige abroad will be just as high as the spokesmen for America allow it to be.
Now, when we have a presidential candidate, for example - Senator Kennedy - stating over and over again that the United States is second in space and the fact of the matter is that the space score today is twenty-eight to eight - we've had twenty-eight successful shots, they've had eight; when he states that we're second in education, and I have seen Soviet education and I've seen ours, and we're not; that we're second in science because they may be ahead in one area or another, when overall we're way ahead of the Soviet Union and all other countries in science; when he says as he did in January of this year that we have the worst slums, that we have the most crowded schools; when he says that seventeen million people go to bed hungry every night; when he makes statements like this, what does this do to American prestige?
Well, it can only have the effect certainly of reducing it.
Well let me make one thing clear.
Senator Kennedy has a responsibility to criticize those things that are wrong, but he has also a responsibility to be right in his criticism.
Every one of these items that I have mentioned he's been wrong - dead wrong.
And for that reason he has contributed to any lack of prestige.
Finally, let me say this: as far as prestige is concerned, the first place it would show up would be in the United Nations.
Now Senator Kennedy has referred to the vote on Communist China.
Let's look at the vote on Hungary.
There we got more votes for condemning Hungary and looking into that situation than we got the last year.
Let's look at the reaction eh - reaction to Khrushchev and Eisenhower at the last U.N. session.
Did Khrushchev gain because he took his shoe off and pounded the table and shouted and insulted?
Not at all.
The President gained.
America gained by continuing the dignity, the decency that has characterized us and it's that that keeps the prestige of America up, not running down America the way Senator Kennedy has been running her down.
 I really don't need uh - Mr. Nixon to tell me about what my responsibilities are as a citizen.
I've served this country for fourteen years in the Congress and before that in the service.
I've just as high a devotion, just as high an opinion.
What I downgrade, Mr. Nixon, is the leadership the country is getting, not the country.
Now I didn't make most of the statements that you said I made.
The s- I believe the Soviet Union is first in outer space.
We have - may have made more shots but the size of their rocket thrust and all the rest - you yourself said to Khrushchev, "You may be ahead of us in rocket thrust but we're ahead of you in color television" in your famous discussion in the kitchen.
I think that color television is not as important as rocket thrust.
Secondly, I didn't say we had the worst slums in the world.
I said we had too many slums.
And that they are bad, and we ought to do something about them, and we ought to support housing legislation which this Administration has opposed.
I didn't say we had the worst education in the world.
What I said was that ten years ago, we were producing twice as many scientists and engineers as the Soviet Union and today they're producing twice as many as we are, and that this affects our security around the world.
And fourth, I believe that the polls and other studies and votes in the United Nations and anyone reading the paper and any citizen of the United States must come to the conclusion that the United States no longer carries the same image of a vital society on the move with its brightest days ahead as it carried a decade or two decades ago.
Part of that is because we've stood still here at home, because we haven't met our problems in the United States, because we haven't had a moving economy.
Part of that, as the Gallup Polls show, is because the Soviet Union made a breakthrough in outer space.
Mr. George Allen, head of your Information Service, has said that that made the people of the world begin to wonder whether we were first in science.
We're first in other areas of science but in space, which is the new science, we're not first.
 Yes, I think the next president of the United States should make one last effort to secure an agreement on the cessation of tests, number one.
I think we should go back to Geneva, who's ever elected president, Mr. Nixon or myself, and try once again.
If we fail then, if we're unable to come to an agreement - and I hope we can come to an agreement because it does not merely involve now the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union as atomic powers.
Because new breakthroughs in atomic energy technology there's some indications that by the time the next president's term of office has come to an end, there may be ten, fifteen, or twenty countries with an atomic capacity, perhaps that many testing bombs with all the effect that it could have on the atmosphere and with all the chances that more and more countries will have an atomic capacity, with more and more chance of war.
So one more effort should be made.
I don't think that even if that effort fails that it will be necessary to carry on tests in the atmosphere which pollute the atmosphere.
They can be carried out underground, they c- could be carried on in outer space.
But I believe the effort should be made once more by who's ever elected president of the United States.
If we fail, it's been a great serious failure for everyone - for the human race.
I hope we can succeed.
But then if we fail responsibility will be clearly on the Russians and then we'll have to meet our responsibilities to the security of the United States, and there may have to be testing underground.
I think the Atomic Energy Committee is prepared for it.
There may be testing in outer space.
I hope it will not be necessary for any power to resume uh - testing in the atmosphere.
It's possible to detect those kind of tests.
The kind of tests which you can't detect are underground or in - in uh - perhaps in outer space.
So that I'm hopeful we can try once more.
If we fail then we must meet our responsibilities to ourselves.
But I'm most concerned about the whole problem of the spread of atomic weapons.
China may have it by 1963, Egypt.
War has been the constant companion of mankind, so to have these weapons disseminated around the world, I believe means that we're going to move through a period of hazard in the next few years.
We ought to make one last effort.
 Yes.
I would say first of all that we must have in mind the fact that we have been negotiating to get tests inspected and uh - to get an agreement for many, many months.
As a matter of fact, there's been a moratorium on testing as a result of the fact that we have been negotiating.
I've reached the conclusion that the Soviet Union is actually filibustering.
I've reached the conclusion, too, based on the reports that have been made, that they may be cheating.
I don't think we can wait until the next president is inaugurated and then uh - select a new team and then all the months of negotiating that will take place before we reach a decision, I think that immediately after this election we should set a timetable - the next president, working with the present President, President Eisenhower - a timetable to break the Soviet filibuster.
There should be no tests in the atmosphere; that rules out any fall-out.
But as far as underground tests for developing peaceful uses of atomic energy, we should not allow this Soviet filibuster to continue.
I think it's time for them to fish or cut bait.
I think that the next president immediately after his election should sit down with the President, work out a timetable, and - get a decision on this before January of next year.
 Well the conditions I laid out in one of our previous television debates, and it's rather difficult to be much more specific than that.
Uh - First of all, we have to have adequate preparation for a summit conference.
This means at the secretary of state level and at the ambassadorial level.
By adequate preparation I mean that at that level we must prepare an agenda, an agenda agreed upon with the approval of the heads of state involved.
Now this agenda should delineate those issues on which there is a possibility of some agreement or negotiation.
I don't believe we should go to a summit conference unless we have such an agenda, unless we have some reasonable insur- assurance from Mr. Khrushchev that he intends seriously to negotiate on those points.
Now this may seem like a rigid, inflexible position.
But let's look at the other side of the coin.
If we build up the hopes of the world by having a summit conference that is not adequately prepared, and then, if Mr. Khrushchev finds some excuse for breaking it up - as he did this one - because he isn't going to get his way - we'd set back the cause of peace.
We do not help it.
We can, in other words, negotiate many of these items of difference between us without going to the summit.
I think we have to make a greater effort than we have been making at the secretary of state level, at the ambassadorial level, to work out the differences that we have.
And so far as the summit conference is concerned, it should only be entered in upon, it should only be agreed upon, if the negotiations have reached the point that we have some reasonable assurance that something is going to come out of it, other than some phony spirit - a spirit of Geneva, or Camp David, or whatever it is.
When I say "phony spirit," I mean phony, not because the spirit is not good on our side, but because the Soviet Union simply doesn't intend to carry out what they say.
Now, these are the conditions that I can lay out.
I cannot be more precise than that, because until we see what Mr. Khrushchev does and what he says uh - we cannot indicate what our plans will be.
 Well, I think the president of the United States last winter indicated that before he'd go to the summit in May he did last fall, he indicated that there should be some agenda, that there should be some prior agreement.
He hoped that there would be uh - b- be an agreement in part in disarmament.
He also expressed the hope that there should be some understanding of the general situation in Berlin.
The Soviet Union refused to agree to that, and we went to the summit and it was disastrous.
I believe we should not go to the summit until there is some reason to believe that a meeting of minds can be obtained on either Berlin, outer space, or general disarmament - including nuclear testing.
In addition, I believe the next president in January and February should go to work in building the strength of the United States.
The Soviet Union does understand strength.
We arm to parley, Winston Churchill said ten years ago.
If we are strong, particularly as we face a crisis over Berlin - which we may in the spring, or in the winter - it's important that we maintain our determination here; that we indicate that we're building our strength; that we are determined to protect our position; that we're determined to protect our commitment.
And then I believe we should indicate our desire to live at peace with the world.
But until we're strong here, until we're moving here, I believe a summit could not be successful.
I hope that before we do meet, there will be preliminary agreements on those four questions, or at least two of them, or even one of them, which would warrant such a meeting.
I think if we had stuck by that position last winter, we would have been in a better position in May.
 One of the areas, and of course the most vulnerable area is - I have felt, has been Eastern Europe.
I've been critical of the Administration's failure to suggest policies which would make it possible for us to establish, for example, closer relations with Poland, particularly after the fifty-five-fifty-six period and the Hungarian revolution.
We indicated at that time that we were not going to intervene militarily.
But there was a period there when Poland demonstrated a national independence and even the Polish government moved some differn- di- distance away from the Soviet Union.
I suggested that we amend our legislation so that we could enjoy closer economic ties.
We received the support first of the Administration and then not, and we were defeated by one vote in the Senate.
We passed the bill in the Senate this year but it didn't pass the House.
I would say Eastern Europe is the area of vulnerability of the uh - s- of the Soviet Union.
Secondly, the relations between Russia and China.
They are now engaged in a debate over whether war is the means of Communizing the world or whether they should use subversion, infiltration, economic struggles and all the rest.
No one can say what that course of action will be, but I think the next president of the United States should watch it carefully.
If those two powers should split, it could have great effects throughout the entire world.
Thirdly, I believe that India represents a great area for affirmative action by the free world.
India started from about the same place that China did.
Chinese Communists have been moving ahead the last ten years.
India under a free society has been making some progress.
But if India does not succeed - with her four hundred and fifty million people, if she can't make freedom work - then people around the world are going to determine - particularly in the underdeveloped world - that the only way that they can develop their resources is through the Communist system.
Fourth, let me say that in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Eastern Europe, the great force on our side is the desire of people to be free.
This has expressed itself in the revolts in Eastern Europe.
It's expressed itself in the desire of the people of Africa to be independent of Western Europe.
They want to be free.
And my judgment is that they don't want to give their freedom up to become Communists.
They want to stay free, independent perhaps of us, but certainly independent of the Communists.
And I believe if we identify ourselves with that force, if we identify ourselves with it as Lincoln, as Wilson did, as Franklin Roosevelt did, if we become known as the friend of freedom, sustaining freedom, helping freedom, helping these people in the fight against poverty and ignorance and disease, helping them build their lives, I believe in Latin America, Africa, and Asia, eventually in the Eastern Europe and the Middle East, certainly in Western Europe, we can strengthen freedom.
We can make it move.
We can put the Communists on the defensive.
 First, with regard to Poland, when I talked to Mr. Gomulka, the present leader of Poland, for six hours in Warsaw last year, I learned something about their problems and particularly his.
Right under the Soviet gun, with Soviet troops there, he is in a very difficult position in taking anything independent, a position which would be independent of the Soviet Union.
And yet let's just see what we've done for Poland, A half a billion dollars worth of aid has gone to Poland, primarily economic, primarily to go to the people of Poland.
This should continue and it can be stepped up to give them hope and to keep alive the hope for freedom that I can testify they have so deeply within them.
In addition we can have more exchange with Poland or with any other of the Iron Curtain countries which show some desire to take a different path than the path that has been taken by the ones that are complete satellites of the Soviet Union.
Now as far as the balance of the world is concerned, I of course don't have as much time as Senator Kennedy had.
I would just like to s- add this one point.
If we are going to have the initiative in the world, we must remember that the people of Africa and Asia and Latin America don't want to be pawns simply in a struggle between two great powers - the Soviet Union and the United States.
We have to let them know that we want to help them, not because we're simply trying to save our own skins, not because we're simply trying to fight Communism; but because we care for them, because we stand for freedom, because if there were no Communism in the world, we would still fight poverty and misery and disease and tyranny.
If we can get that across to the people of these countries, in this decade of the sixties, the struggle for freedom will be won.
 I would say that the issue will stay with us as a campaign issue just as long as Senator Kennedy persists in what I think is a fundamental error.
He says he supports the President's position.
He says that he voted for the resolution.
Well just let me point this out; he voted for the resolution in 1955 which gave the president the power to use the forces of the United States to defend Formosa and the offshore islands.
But he also voted then for an amendment - which was lost, fortunately - an amendment which would have drawn a line and left out those islands and denied the p- right to the president to defend those islands if he thought that it was an attack on Formosa.
He repeated that error in 1959, in the speech that he made.
He repeated it again in a television debate that we had.
Now, my point is this: Senator Kennedy has got to be consistent here.
Either he's for the President and he's against the position that those who opposed the President in fifty-five and fifty-nine - and the Senator's position itself, stated the other day in our debate - either he is for the President and against that position or we simply have a disagreement here that must continue to be debated.
Now if the Senator in his answer to this question will say "I now will depart, or retract my previous views; I think I was wrong in I 955; I think I was wrong in 1959; and I think I was wrong in our television debate to say that we should draw a line leaving out Quemoy and Matsu - draw a line in effect abandoning these islands to the Communists;" then this will be right out of the campaign because there will be no issue between us.
I support the President's position.
I have always opposed drawing a line.
I have opposed drawing a line because I know that the moment you draw a line, that is an encouragement for the Communists to attack - to step up their blackmail and to force you into the war that none of us want.
And so I would hope that Senator Kennedy in his answer today would clear it up.
It isn't enough for him to say "I support the President's position, that I voted for the resolution."
Of course, he voted for the resolution - it was virtually unanimous.
But the point is, what about his error in voting for the amendment, which was not adopted, and then persisting in it in fifty-nine, persisting in it in the debate.
It's very simple for him to clear it up.
He can say now that he no longer believes that a line should be drawn leaving these islands out of the perimeter of defense.
If he says that, this issue will not be discussed in the campaign.
 Well, Mr. Nixon, to go back to 1955.
The resolution commits the president in the United States, which I supported, to defend uh - Formosa, the Pescadores, and if it was his military judgment, these islands.
Then the President sent a mission, composed of Admiral Radford and Mr. Robertson, to persuade Chiang Kai-shek in the spring of fifty-five to withdraw from the two islands, because they were exposed.
The President was unsuccessful; Chiang Kai-shek would not withdraw.
I refer to the fact that in 1958, as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, I'm very familiar with the position that the United States took in negotiating with the Chinese Communists on these two islands.
General Twining, in January, fifty-nine, described the position of the United States.
The position of the United States has been that this build-up, in the words of the president, has been foolish.
Mr. Herter has said these islands are indefensible.
Chiang Kai-shek will not withdraw.
Because he will not withdraw, because he's committed to these islands, because we've been unable to persuade him to withdraw, we are in a very difficult position.
And therefore, the President's judgment has been that we should defend the islands if, in his military judgment and the judgment of the commander in the field, the attack on these islands should be part of an overall attack on Formosa.
I support that.
In view of the difficulties we've had with the islands, in view of the difficulties and disputes we've had with Chiang Kai-shek, that's the only position we can take.
That's not the position you took, however.
The first position you took, when this matter first came up, was that we should draw the line and commit ourselves, as a matter of principle, to defend these islands.
Not as part of the defense of Formosa and the Pescadores.
You showed no recognition of the Administration program to try to persuade Chiang Kai-shek for the last five years to withdraw from the islands.
And I challenge you tonight to deny that the Administration has sent at least several missions to persuade Chiang Kai-shek's withdrawal from these islands.
 And that's the testimony of uh - General Twining and the Assistant Secretary of State in fifty-eight.
 I uh - said that I've served this country for fourteen years.
I served it uh - in the war.
I'm devoted to it.
If I lose this election, I will continue in the Senate to try to build a stronger country.
But I run because I believe this year the United States has a great opportunity to make a move forward, to make a determination here at home and around the world, that it's going to reestablish itself as a vigorous society.
My judgment is that the Republican party has stood still here in the United States, and it's also stood still around the world.
Uh - We're using about fifty percent of our steel capacity today.
We had a recession in fifty-eight.
We had a recession in fifty-four.
We're not moving ahead in education the way we should.
We didn't make a judgment in fifty-seven and fifty-six and fifty-five and fifty-four that outer space would be important.
If we stand still here, if we appoint people to ambassadorships and positions in Washington who have a status quo outlook, who don't recognize that this is a revolutionary time, then the United States does not maintain its influence.
And if we fail, the cause of freedom fails.
I believe it incumbent upon the next president of the United States to get this country moving again, to get our economy moving ahead, to set before the American people its goals, its unfinished business.
And then throughout the world appoint the best people we can get, ambassadors who can speak the language - no mere - not merely people who made a political contribution but who can speak the language.
Bring students here; let them see what kind of a country we have.
Mr. Nixon said that we should not regard them as pawns in the cold war; we should identify ourselves with them.
If that were true, why didn't we identify ourselves with the people of Africa?
Why didn't we bring students over here?
Why did we suddenly offer Congo three hundred students last June when they had the tremendous revolt?
That was more than we had offered to all of Africa before from the federal government.
I believe that this party - Republican party - has stood still really for twenty-five years - its leadership has.
It opposed all of the programs of President Roosevelt and others - the minimum wage and for housing and economic growth and development of our natural resources, the Tennessee Valley and all the rest.
And I believe that if we can get a party which believes in movement, which believes in going ahead, then we can reestablish our position in the world - strong defense, strong in economic growth, justice for our people, co- guarantee of constitutional rights, so that people will believe that we practice what we preach, and then around the world, particularly to try to reestablish the atmosphere which existed in Latin America at the time of Franklin Roosevelt.
He was a good neighbor in Latin America because he was a good neighbor in the United States; because they saw us as a society that was compassionate, that cared about people, that was moving this country ahead.
I believe it my responsibility as the leader of the Democratic party in 1960 to try to warn the American people that in this crucial time we can no longer afford to stand still.
We can no longer afford to be second best.
I want people all over the world to look to the United States again, to feel that we're on the move, to feel that our high noon is in the future.
I want Mr. Khrushchev to know that a new generation of Americans who fought in Europe and Italy and the Pacific for freedom in World War II have now taken over in the United States, and that they're going to put this country back to work again.
I don't believe that there is anything this country cannot do.
I don't believe there's any burden, or any responsibility, that any American would not assume to protect his country, to protect our security, to advance the cause of freedom.
And I believe it incumbent upon us now to do that.
Franklin Roosevelt said in 1936 that that generation of Americans had a rendezvous with destiny.
I believe in 1960 and sixty-one and two and three we have a rendezvous with destiny.
And I believe it incumbent upon us to be the defenders of the United States and the defenders of freedom; and to do that, we must give this country leadership and we must get America moving again.
 Senator Kennedy has said tonight again what he has said several times in the course of this - these debates and in the campaign, that American is standing still.
America is not standing still.
It has not been standing still.
And let's set the record straight right now by looking at the record, as Al Smith used to say.
He talks about housing.
We built more houses in the last seven years than in any Administration and thirty percent more than in the previous Administration.
We talk about schools - three times as many classrooms built in the past Administration - and Eisenhower - than under the Truman Administration.
Let's talk about civil rights.
More progress in the past eight years than in the whole eighty years before.
He talks about the progress in the field of slum clearance and the like.
We find four times as many projects undertaken and completed in this Administration than in the previous one.
Anybody that says America has been standing still for the last seven and a half years hasn't been traveling in America.
He's been in some other country.
Let's get that straight right away.
Now the second point we have to understand is this, however.
America has not been standing still.
But America cannot stand pat.
We can't stand pat for the reason that we're in a race, as I've indicated.
We can't stand pat because it is essential with the conflict that we have around the world that we not just hold our own, that we not keep just freedom for ourselves.
It is essential that we extend freedom, extend it to all the world.
And this means more than what we've been doing.
It means keeping America even stronger militarily than she is.
It means seeing that our economy moves forward even faster than it has.
It means making more progress in civil rights than we have so that we can be a splendid example for all the world to see - a democracy in action at its best.
Now, looking at the other parts of the world - South America - talking about our record and the previous one.
We had a good neighbor policy, yes.
It sounded fine.
But let's look at it.
There were eleven dictators when we came into power in 1953 in Latin America.
There are only three left.
Let's look at Africa.
Twenty new countries in Africa during the course of this Administration.
Not one of them selected a Communist government.
All of them voted for freedom - a free type of government.
Does this show that Communism has the bigger pull, or freedom has the bigger pull?
Am I trying to indicate that we have no problems in Africa or Latin America or Asia?
Of course not.
What I am trying to indicate is that the tide of history's on our side, and that we can keep it on our side, because we're on the right side.
We're on the side of freedom.
We're on the side of justice against the forces of slavery, against the forces of injustice.
But we aren't going to move America forward and we aren't going to be able to lead the world to win this struggle for freedom if we have a permanent inferiority complex about American achievements.
Because we are first in the world in space, as I've indicated; we are first in science; we are first in education, and we're going to move even further ahead with the kind of leadership that we can provide in these years ahead.
One other point I would make: what could you do?
Senator Kennedy and I are candidates for the presidency of the United States.
And in the years to come it will be written that one or the other of us was elected and that he was or was not a great president.
What will determine whether Senator Kennedy or I, if I am elected, was a great president?
It will not be our ambition that will determine it, because greatness is not something that is written on a campaign poster.
It will be determined to the extent that we represent the deepest ideals, the highest feelings and faith of the American people.
In other words, the next president, as he leads America and the free world, can be only as great as the American people are great.
And so I say in conclusion, keep America's faith strong.
See that the young people of America, particularly, have faith in the ideals of freedom and faith in God, which distinguishes us from the atheistic materialists who oppose us.
TOTAL # OF SENTENCES: 16398
